SPEAKER 0
OK, hello. Uh, thanks for coming. Nice to meet you. Uh, my name is, um, so 5 minutes after the hour is usually about right. Uh, any early is a problem, but I wanna make sure, uh, people have time to get here. Just, just give it a few more minutes. OK, um, yeah, so everybody downloaded the, uh, the notes in my extra slides and everything. Any problems there? So, uh, uh, so anyway, my name is, uh, you know, as you can see, Doctor David Caldwell. You can call me Doctor Caldwell if you prefer for some reason, but David is fine. Uh, you can call me David. Um, so, uh, they, you know, they recommend we begin by saying a few words about ourselves. It sounds vain, but the experts think it's a good idea and so, uh, sort of, um. The idea is to explain why we got into this field, you know, um, and I can tell people don't really care about it, but they do recommend this sort of thing. So anyway, I started out in mathematics, full disclosure, I started out in mathematics, did undergrad in math, up to a PhD in math, and, um, and then my PhD thesis was an application to finance. I liked finance and so I decided to do a second PhD in finance, but, um, but I am sort of a math geek and, um, so you'll see. Even today, um, you'll have a few extra proofs and so on that are not, they're not examinable. Uh, anything else? Uh, I haven't worked in the industry. I got that question too, um. Uh, one of my, um, best friends and colleagues, uh, also has two PhDs, one in math and one in finance, and he goes back and forth between industry and academia, but he's a better coder than I am actually. So, uh, and, uh, I never really wanted to work in the industry. I wanted to teach and do research, so that's my thing, but, but he is a quant, so my area is sort of, uh, sort of quant. Uh, anyway, but, uh, so I like this course. If, if you, I'm only teaching for 3 weeks, which is very weird, I understand. Uh, uh, just I, I've got an admin job at the moment that, um, Means I teach less than usual. Strange for me, even that I'll go back to normal the next year, not that it affects you. But, um, but anyway, for these 3 weeks, these are my favourite topics and this of course, is, uh, uh, these, uh, 3 weeks that I'll be covering. Um, so I hope you've read all the comments here. These notes do not contain any new examinable material. They have some elaborations on the lecture notes with extra explanations and examples, even a few mathematical derivations which are not examinable. So, so there's nothing special about these. I will refer to them in class if you can ignore them if you don't find them useful. Um, so for today's lecture we have another strange thing, uh, the timing, um, I'm not quite sure about the timing for this lecture, and it's very important that we finish PPP, um, purchasing power parity for the, uh, for the, uh, uh, tutorial questions this week. So what I'm gonna do is I, you see I've written an extra, I do have a few, does that, is that red? You can see it highlighted in red, yeah, so for today's, today's lecture, I'm not gonna do the first few slides in chapter 6. I'm gonna skip ahead to chapter 16, go to the end of the chapter, do the 1st 21 chapters of chapter 4, and then I'll come back to chapter 6 for those first few slides. The first few slides are kind of easy, general discussions, and they're not really a big part of the, um. Uh, the, uh, tutorial, uh, questions. Uh, is the sound OK? Everybody can hear me? Everybody's good to hear me? Good. That's the thing I should check before I talk for five minutes. Cool, um, I'm best with the handheld one. I, I can never wear the lapel thing, so I'll see how this goes. OK, so, um, so let's, let's get started then. So we're in chapter 6. This is a tricky, uh, section the stuff we'll be covering. It is, it does get a bit involved, so, um. Um, so, so here are the things, so we're gonna skip this, we'll come back to these things later. Um, you can see it's sort of general, just general discussions about markets and what's changed over the, over recent years. So it's not, uh, not a lot of heavy, heavy work. And hopefully I'll finish it by the end of the day, but I'm not, not quite sure. Um, oh yeah, from this slide, uh, this is kind of a fun one. It, uh, you know, fun. I, I say fun, um, this shows you, um, how popular different currencies are. This is, uh, uh, international role anyway. The US plays a huge role, like 88.4% of, uh. Of a This is now share. This is a share of foreign exchange trading volume is essential in the bottom, so it's trading volume. Uh, the US is huge. We have a huge list of, uh, of, um, currencies there, and we're gonna, and, and I, so I added another thing you might not have seen this on the, um. On Moodle, I just left it at the bottom because it's it's kind of silly, but I've got a slide here, uh, for um. I just asked uh AI to print out some common FX currency abbreviations and so you can have a look, you know, there's no, you don't have to memorise these or anything, but, but even in today's lecture we'll see I highlighted some of them, you know, we'll see of course US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, and this is sort of the new, uh, approach now. These are sort of the, this is a little more common now, so it can be hard to find, for example, I, I, I, I'll, um. It can't be hard to find the, the, the symbol for the euro, you know, it's an E with two lines through it, so it's much easier to just type E U E U R and the same for the yen, Euro yen has a, a Y with two lines through it. It's much easier to type JPY for that. And um and the British pound is another one with the weird symbol. So these are sort of easier than using the uh the symbols. So in my, uh, the things that I've typed, I'm using these, these terms and just today, so we're gonna see why isn't it scrolling. We'll even see, uh, I think the Norwegian krona, Swedish krona, or Danish krona. We mentioned the Polish zlati. Uh, Korean, South Korean won, Thai bat. South African rand, Brazilian real, so on, and it's, it's the textbook has a huge list that's sort of like too big to be useful almost, but, uh, but this is quite a handy list, so you know, I thought that was just kind of fun. Uh, so there you go. So here we are Slide 16. Um, so we're in this, in these sections we're gonna look at spot quotes, the bid and ask spread, direct versus indirect quotation, cross rates, and currency arbitrage. We'll see an arbitrage opportunity in a few minutes. So the spot rates, um, uh, I'll, I'll read this. Let's see, I'm better off without my glasses. Uh, the price quote of a currency for immediate delivery, that's what I mean the spot rate spot price, that's the price you can get right now. It's widely disseminated in news outlets, and we have, uh, I don't care about the American terms versus the, uh, uh, European terms. Uh, what do I have my, uh, slides. Oh, that's, that's for, uh, that's for later. Yeah, so I, I will look at a few of these, of these things, uh, um, sometimes they have US dollar on top and sometimes they have US dollar on the bottom. That doesn't really, it really doesn't make any difference, but, um, uh, and you know, you just take what's given to you. But let's, look, look, for example, at, uh, so what do I have? I wanna look at the US dollar over euro so you can find that one. Maybe I can. US dollar over euro. Um OK, that's right. Where's the euro? So here's the euro here, euro here in American terms. There we go. So the price is 118.15. So it's US dollar over euro. Can, can I go, can I go back? It shows on this side. Uh, let's see, where is it now? This is in Ame in American terms, oh sorry, yeah, the American terms are. Yeah, US dollar on top, euro on the bottom. OK. Uh, so it's, it's 11.1815, and what that means is, so if you see this. You sorry. Where did I lose it? So if you see this, what it means is that's the price of um. The price is $1 for each euro you buy. So the thing on the bottom is, and the next one is 1 is the price of Japanese yen per each US dollar you buy. So the next one is it costs 106.25 Japanese yen per each US dollar. So the thing on the bottom is always when you have one of those of those units. So, so the price is in terms of the numerator and uh and the thing that you're buying is one of the uh thing on the bottom. Is that OK? And that's, that's consistent throughout this uh chapter. I know, uh and uh you'll see it in the uh tutorial problems and so on. So that's, that's one thing we're gonna practise. Um, so, so the price is in terms of, so you don't have, you do not have to remember whether it's using the American term or the European term, that's uh. That was kind of uh silly. Uh, it'll show you, it'll show you, uh, which, it'll, you know, you, you will be given these terms, these expressions, and, uh, and you'll just have to understand that it's so and so for each unit in the denominator. OK Um, and, uh, another nice kind of, uh, Uh, sorry, industry, uh, trick is the last digit is called a PIP. In, uh, in interest rates they talk about basis points. I don't know if you've seen basis points, but, um, so you get, you get more precise than a cent is, is the point. So for the euro, uh, the PI, you know, the 5 is called the PIP. In fact, there are 15 PIs there. Uh, and sometimes they get something called a pipette, which is even 1/10 of a pip, so, um. There we go. Um, so, so that's a nice, so this is a nice illustration here. This is US dollars per euro. So for each, each euro you buy, you pay 1.18156. Um, US dollars. And the way they do it is, um, you see, it says. They often Yeah, traders refer to the number up to 2 digits after the decimal point as the big figure. So, so the, the, the ones highlighted in red, that's the big figure. You're supposed to know what that is. You have to be, you have to be really stunned if you don't know that, uh, that's the current, uh, big number for this, uh, currency. And then when it comes to a trade, they often omit the big figure and just quote the quote the currency in PIPs. They'll say it's, um, you know, 15 pips. And so, so you know that you had 15 pips to the big figure. It's kind of clever, isn't it? It makes you feel like you know what you're doing. And um from what I'm told, the use of the more precise ones, pipe pipettes and and so on. It's mostly just for, uh, you know, it wouldn't be for quoted trades. It would be for, um, you know, uh, just straight, uh, computer trades. So for algorithmic trading and, uh, and, uh, and that sort of thing. Um, but, uh, but they do. You can have, uh, in some cases you can have, you know, 1000 quotes in a In a, in a second. OK, so now a big topic is the bid and ask spread. Currency prices are different for buyers and sellers. And they're subject to different prices. So the text says this a few times, buy the bid, by the base currency, so the, oh, can I, can I go through that? Did I, did I forget that one? Um. Oh well. Uh, when we write When we write, for example, uh, uh, so, so this is, so, so if we had, where did we have this one up here? Great British pound GB pound, yeah, so right here we have this is the example I'm using one, British pound equals $1.3118188. And so, um, so anyway, oh, I've written 1183. Anyway, this is another way of writing, uh, uh, prices, and this is completely, you know, unambiguous. You know, 1 pound is equal to this many US dollars, and usually when you see something quoted, you, you wanna write it in this form. It's, it's much, much easier to figure out what's going on if you write it in this form. And in this form, uh, the, the thing with the one in front of it is called the base currency, and the other one is called the quote currency. So the quote currency is where the number comes from. And the base currency is where you're imagining buying one of those of those units, so there's one in front of it, it's called the base currency. And the other one is called the uh quote. The quote, uh, currency. So this says buy by the base currency and the bid price, sell at the ask price, but that that's tricky because it's the dealer that's quoting that's quoting these so that a dealer offers all these prices they, they wanna announce all these prices and uh and in this example they're saying that um. Uh, well, trust me on this, the ask will be bigger than the bid. The ask is bigger than the bid. So for, for this little, uh, I better erase that maybe right now for this quote here, it's got two numbers here 1.3183 and 1.3188. Can you see that? And, um, so that means that they are willing to buy it at the bid and sell it at the ask. But we have the we have the opposite position. And so that means we must, so it looks like I'm crossing that out, we must buy at the ask and sell at the bid. So for us as traders, We, we buy at the ask, pay at the bid, and when you buy, you always pay a little more than you would like. And when you sell, you always receive a little bit less than you would like. Fair enough. When you buy, you pay a little more, so the big number is, is the ask price is what you buy, what you pay when you buy, you pay more, and when you sell something, you get less than you, you would like, and, uh, that's the, uh, the bid. So ask over bid, buy the ask, sell the bid. So this other terminology was from the, the dealer's point of view and it's to me that's a little confusing. The big numbers to ask and so on. Anything else? Um. And, and the difference is how they make their money. That's, uh, it's instead of a transaction cost, it's equivalent to a transaction cost, more or less, mathematically, I guess. Uh, so, um, boy, I start to mumble. OK, I, I, uh, is the volume all right? Is this too much? Hello? Oh, Let's see, boy, that was very sanitary, um, anyway, um, um, but, but, so they make money on that spread. That, that's what the spread is for, so that the dealer, the person quoting these, they, they have a lot of responsibility. They make these quotes and they, they, you, they promise that they will allow, they will allow you to buy at this price and sell at this price. And sometimes you can get prices in between, you know, it's possible to get prices between the bid and ask, within the bid and ask spread, but that's, you know, we don't need to talk about that. Well, you know, we're guaranteed we can get buy the ask and sell at the bid. And um and sometimes we calculate the percent spread that's just, uh, taking the difference between the ask and the bid and, and what you have to remember is you're dividing by the ask for whatever reason when they take the percent spread they divide by the ask. Don't think it's a big part of your assessment, but that would be uh something to remember. So in this case, the bid ask spread, as you can see, is about 3.0038%. So pretty, pretty, uh, precise, OK. And um Just let me make sure that's good. Yeah, OK, that's another thing. Just, yes, and, um, so when we look at this example here, we got a banker in Paris that wants to contact a banker in Warsaw, Poland, so there's a Polish zloti. I don't remember what the uh symbol for that is. He want, he wants, what's the price for, um, €150 million we don't know if it's buying or selling. So the trader gives back, uh, this. 75/65 over 70. So, so that's the, that, that's giving the uh the, the, the bid prices of the small one and the ask price is the big one. And what, what the, uh, the, the, the broker is supposed to know is that the big number is you can see is 4.31. So the bid, the smaller number is 4.3165. And the bigger number is 4.3170 and you can see so and it turns out he wants to buy. €15 million. And the trade happens quickly and if you look through this uh sort of messy looking, uh, thing here. The price confirmed is is the bigger number, the 5.4.3170. So, so you are buying at the bigger number and you would sell a smaller number, very clear, and it's the ask, goes alphabetically A over B. And there's, there's no So anyway, it's the dealers, you know. That's, that should be unambiguous, really. Um, OK. Any questions? Yeah, interrupt anytime with questions, please. Um, um, so the next thing, cross currencies, cross rates. The idea is that, um, and we have a lot of standard quotes, but, um, it's usually, you know. The cross rate is when you have to use a third currency to find a quote. Um, so the idea is, can I go back to we're, we're gonna, we're gonna see, you can read this on, let me look at an example. Cross rates. So, so you might see, you might see quotes for euro and US dollar and Australian dollar and US dollar, but we don't see quotes for euro per Australian dollar. So that's what a cross rate is and, and we're gonna have a weird one coming up, uh. You know, Brazilian reals versus Thai batts. There's nobody that's gonna say, here's, here's the, the quote for, for those two kind of, uh, uh, unusual currencies. It's always, almost always something per euro, something per US dollar. Uh, that's the most common one. You can see others, you can see quotes per euro sometimes as well. So that's where we're getting at with these, uh, slides. OK, and so, so how do we find these cross rates? That's, that's what, that's what we're trying to do now. We need to calculate the cross rate between the real and the bot. And uh we want to bid and ask. OK. Uh, so we're gonna find the cross rate by, um, buying bats. With reels using rails to buy bats and uh buying rails with bats, so both, both cases, OK so here, so here are the better as spreads so for per for per US dollar. So, um, So, um The price, the price for each US dollar is, um, it would be, you know, 0.9955 reals for the bid and 1.0076 reals for the ask. So if you're buying a US dollar, you pay a higher number. If you're selling a US dollar, you, you receive the lower number, and there are the numbers for the tied batts. OK, ready to go? OK, so I, I've got my slides here. I, uh, I hope, I hope you like this. OK. OK, so I'm gonna step back for a minute and um first I'll do this without the Bra spread. So let's keep the numbers simple and we'll ignore the bid as spread. Suppose we have two exchange rates, we know that um. Um, you, you spend, you pay 0.9, OK, so we have this Brazilian real 0.9 over US dollar, you know, Thai bat 25 over US dollar. So what that means is $1 is 0.9 British reals and $1 is 25 Thai batts. Those are the, that's the notation. And um, so, and we wanna know the, you know, we're gonna find, um, we wanna find. What, what one British real is in terms of Thai bats. And it happens immediately when you don't have to worry the bit spread. Look how quick it is. Um, let me erase a few things here. Um, I'm gonna use this many British reals to buy Thai bats and just put the equations together. 0.9 equal British rials equals $1 and that equals 25 Thai batts, so you immediately see that 0.9 British reals equals 25 batts. Simple, quick and easy, yeah, and then, and then you can, you know, you can, you can make the left-hand side equal to 1 or the right hand side equal 1. And we've, uh, they've chosen to write it as 1 British real equals, so just divide by 0.9 and we get our answer. Is that easy? Easy peasy, yeah. Cool. OK, so now what happens when you have a bid ask spread? Sure, no questions? OK. Now we've got the better experience. Um, OK. So we have these numbers down here. So instead of R I'm writing BRL and dollar US dollar and the B at the bottom, that's, that's the tie back THB, but the numbers are the numbers are the same. So the bid rate. Is, uh, so there's, there's the, uh, Brazilian real US dollar rate. Um, the bid rate, the small number is 0.9955, the big number is 1.0076. And I really like, you know, I, I really recommend sort of putting it in. Me writing it in these forms. And um so $1 so if you're if you're buying, so if you're buying, so if you're buying $1 you would pay 1.0076 British reals and if you're selling US dollars you would only receive 0.9955 British reals, OK. And we got the same numbers for the for the tie bat, so, um, and so the smaller numbers is 25.2513 and the ask is uh 25. 3986. OK. So I'd just like to clarify the numbers before we uh take another step. You good? I've already had people leave. It's not a bad sign, but anyway, uh, uh, you know, you can't take it seriously anymore. And I've, I've seen other people say, where, where, where are you going, you know, but, um, people have their reasons, and I, you know, I'm a father, so I figured, you know, maybe their daughter had a thing to go, her daughter was sick or something, so. So you won't really hurt my feelings if you leave, but it's nice if you stay around. I appreciate it if you stick around. Nice to see you. OK, um, so, so we have these numbers, we know what bids and asks are, and, uh, we can get into the tricky part in a way. Um, we could, there are a few choices we could use. I'm going to start by using Brazilian, so that's actually the. The term for it I won't try to pronounce it, um, I'll I'll call it Reals, that's, that's wrong, but, um, I'll call it Reals. OK, we're gonna use, so we're gonna pretend maybe we're from Brazil and I'm gonna take my reals and buy Thai bats. Um, is, I'm, I'm pressing bat, right? Is this bat, right? Uh, anyway, um, so anyway, what you have to do is first you have to buy US dollars and then you use US dollars to buy Thai bats. OK, so we're gonna buy US dollars. Um, we're using Brazilian reals to buy US dollars. Step one, what do we pay? Do we pay the small number or the big number? How many? OK, that's the question. Uh, how many people think we pay the small number? How many people think we pay the big number? Nice. Hey, hello, isn't that great? That's the most interaction I get. I force you to raise your hand sometimes. I'm cruel that way Yes, and once we have US dollars, we're, we're selling them for Thai batts, and we're, you know, we're buying Thai batts. Uh, that's, that's the thing, I mean, OK, we'll come back to that later. We're buying, we're selling them. Uh, for Thai bats So to sell US dollars. For Ty Barrett. Do we use the big number? Uh, how many thai bats do we receive? Do we receive the, uh, small number? How many people think the small number? Yeah, exactly. There you go. Sorry. I had to blink and look at that a couple of times. That's right. So it's the, uh, you know, it's sort of the off-diagonal numbers in, in each case and, uh, so let's see if we can put that together on the next slide. When we use British rials to buy Thai bats, we find that so, so just connecting these things. So I mean these things are equal now. It's the same, it's still $1 connecting them, and we've shown that um for this, for this transaction. 1.007 British reals is equal to $1 which is equal to, so we have the big number on the left and the small number there that was 25.513 Thai batts. And we know we solve, so we've decided in this case to solve for one, British real. And so you divide by 1.0076 and you get this result. And so, so there we go, you know, do the. Do the calculation with our calculator and um so. So which way do we wanna look at that? So I guess from a, from the perspective of a Thai person, they wanna buy a British, a Brazilian real, they would pay, no sorry, they would, they wanna sell a British real. Hold on, hold on, hold on. OK, OK. If you're, if you have British Brazilian. Brazilian Ariels. Um One Brazilian real is equal to 25.07608 uh Thai bats. OK, so the confusing is buying Thai batts is the same as selling British rials. So this trader is um. Is um selling British Brazilian rails and receiving 250608. So let's see if I can come back to that in a second. This will end up being the bid. OK, but forget about that for the moment. We, we know the mechanics, we know one Brazilian real equals this many Thai bats. For this transaction, this is when we use British rials to buy Thai bats. OK. Now let's go the other way, using Thai bats to buy Brazilian reals. So first you use Thai batts to buy US dollars, then you use US dollars to buy rials. So, we have tie bats. If we're gonna buy US dollars, do we pay the small number or the big number? Do we pay the small number? Do we pay the big number? Yep, it is. I know you. We have to pay the big number here. And once we have US dollars, we have to sell them for Brazilian reals. So to sell to sell US dollars, do we receive the big number or the small number? That's the small number again. And uh and those are the two numbers we use for this calculation. So, so we in this transaction, so when we're, we have Thai bats, we're buying Brazilian reals. Uh, when you use Tiba to buy British rials, we get, um, we find that, um. These are the numbers we have this many thai bats. Can you see it from the previous slide? That's the bigger number for Thai bats. is equal to $1 which is equal to the smaller number for British rials. And um And when you divide through, you find that one again solve for the same uh sort of base base currency again one British real equals this ratio which is 25.5134. OK, so now let's go back and, and, uh, come in on a few things we have, we have two numbers now. British real is equal to 25.5134. And up here a British real was equal to 25.0608. Can you see which number is bigger? The 2nd number was bigger. So this is the ask. And this is the bid, is that all right? So, um, yeah. Yes So if you're um So if you're selling one British Brazilian real, you receive 25.0608 Thai batts. And If you're buying one British rail, you pay the higher number 25.5134 tie bats. Is that right? There you go. And um so I went through it very carefully, every tiny little step and so on. And um there is sort of a quick conclusion you get um. Well, anyway, Um You can sort of see looking at the uh. Uh, and the main thing is if I have the ask on top and the bid on the bottom that gives the largest number. If you have the ask on top and the bin on the bottom, that gives the largest number which will end up being the overall ask. And if you um And you have the bid on the top, you have the smallest, smaller number on top and the bigger number on the bottom that gives the smallest number you can get, and that would be the bid. So, um, So, uh, so that's one thing to keep in mind. Um, you can say I could, I could go on probably, but, uh, I think that's probably enough for now. So, uh, your tutors may have faster ways of proving, of, uh, doing this. People in the industry are really quick with these kinds of calculations, but, uh, but this is really going through every step, uh, uh, you know, point by point at a time. Yeah, but, um, just to drive this on one more time. This is one of the things that makes um. Um Uh, you know, foreign exchange, uh, a bit confusing because. When you're buying one thing you're automatically selling the another thing so you know it, it does get confusing. So you have to go through these things carefully. Am I buying, is this, uh, a purchase or, uh, is this a sale, you know? Am I buying bats or am I selling, uh, British, Brazilian, God, every time Brazilian reals. So, um, so we went through it step by step and hopefully you can see how that came out, but, um, but this, this is, uh, one of the special things about, uh, uh, FX. Um, well, I could say, um, if, if you're wondering about this course, when you, when you work in the finance industry, you will see foreign exchange, you know, everybody's gonna see it somewhere at some time. You can, can, you know, it's really ubiquitous, but, um, to, to be honest, not that many people will specialise in FX, you know what I mean? So, uh, so, it's fundamental, can't escape it, but uh we're not, we're not necessarily saying this will be your, uh, career. But it's, it's very important. There's a lot of money invested in, in, um, in FX as we'll see, uh, at the beginning, we discussed at the beginning of chapter 6. I'll come back to that later in the lecture, hopefully. OK So there you go. I went through that, uh, in a lot of detail. I hope that helps and is not just more confusing. OK, so I'll skip these slides now we've done these, these things here, um. And they've got summa summaries here of the we've got the bid cross rate and ask cross rate on the right hand side there. And um and we've been through all the details. OK. OK Currency arbitrage. We, we can have arbitrage opportunities. They enforce arbitrators enforce the law of one price, so prices of currencies in different markets are equivalent to each other. So we have these 3 quotes, uh, so that's the British pound. Uh, that, that little L with a script with a line through it, the bid price is $1.9422 in New York. The euro is offered, offered, offered is the same as asked. Uh, the offer is ask price is 1.4925 in Frankfurt. And the pound is offered at this many euros in London. So, um, we're looking for arbitrage opportunities here. OK, so let me, let me. Read these numbers and interpret them first. I'm going to my I'm going rogue So see if we can make sense of these things. So this is in New York. The bid is $1.9422 in New York. Bid, so that's the bid price for pounds in New York is $1.9422 US dollars. So you can see, so see the um. Yep, the number here. is in dollars. So it's that many dollars to buy a pound, OK. Uh, I'm sorry, it's not by it's sell bid the bid is for selling. Sorry about that. The bid, yeah, the bid price is this number, so that means we're selling £1 which means if we're selling £1 we're buying. This many US dollars, so there's are equivalent, OK? So I, for this problem, I'm gonna write them both down using both terms. Both expressions. For the next one The euro is offered is asked at $1.4925 in Frankfurt. So in Frankfurt you can buy €1 it's €1 for this many dollars, so you can buy €1. And that means selling That many dollars. Fair enough. OK, and, um, and the last one is in London. The pound is offered at this many euros in London. So the price is um so it's an ask so this is a buy. So what you're gonna pay is you're gonna pay this amount to buy. 1 pound So that's, that's how we interpret those numbers. I just elaborated on a little bit. Fair enough? I think it's the easiest way to uh just just follow every, every step of what's going on. Any questions? You can ask questions. OK, is there an arbitrage opportunity, so. Let's go. Let's start by, yeah, this is a neat trick I think this is kind of cool, uh, what we're gonna do is, I mean this is. You know, you can start anywhere and and make this work, so it is kind of a a crazy problem in some ways. We're gonna start with, start by, but this is a nice, a nice neat one. It's, uh, sort of natural to work with US dollars. Oh, I'm not American in case you're wondering. That's another vain thing I will say about myself that you don't care about. I'm from Canada. That's just full disclosure. Not that, not that it's, you know, not that it makes a big difference. At the moment, but anyway, um, but you know, US dollar dominates, so let's, let's focus on the US dollar. I'm gonna start by selling US dollars. I'm gonna sell a million dollars US dollars and I'm gonna end up by, um, buying US dollars at the end. And see if we make money Yes, there we go. Sorry, it was up top. I wrote, wrote it up here. Finish by buying US dollars, see if we make money. OK, you ready to go? Oh, OK, so in Frankfurt we wanna, so, OK, let me go back, sorry, um, I can't find page up and page down on this, jeez. I like this laptop, but anyway. So, so we want to step on, we wanna sell US dollars, um. And in principle we have more information. There's only one case. Can I, let me start to delete some of these things it's getting. Where can we sell US dollars? Um. We don't sell. There's no sale of US dollars on the first one. Second one, that's step one. You can't sell a dollar and the bottom one. Step one is that middle one. We can sell $1.4925 US dollars to buy €1. We, we don't want to do that. We want to sell a million US dollars and see what we get. So that means that we have to divide both sides by this number and then multiply both sides by a million. Fair enough. So that way we, we've got a million dollars in, in US dollars on the right-hand side. On the left-hand side, we'll have a million dollars divided by €1.429. And um and we're buying those euros, fair enough. So that's where this number comes from. We're buying this many euros. We're selling a million dollars and buying that many euros. Is that all right? OK, so now we have euros, we got to sell our euros. Where can we sell our euros? Um, no euros in the first one. We got, we can sell euros down here. That's step two. We can sell euros to buy British pounds. But again we're not selling €1.2998 we might want to sell. That many euros, a million divided by 1.4925. So when you do that, so you have to multi so you have to, we're step 2 there, can you see that? We got to um divide both sides by this number again. Because, um, because we have, we don't have that number of euros, and then we also multiplied both sides, multiply both sides by. This number down here. OK, and when we do that we get pounds. And we've divided twice now, so we get this many pounds. a million divided by the 1st number and also divided by the 2nd number, OK? And then the last step. Must be the one in New York. We, we now have pounds. We wanna, we wanna get US dollars. How do you buy US dollars? That's step 3 up here. So in that case, we have these numbers. Can you do that? So, um, we're gonna buy US dollars. We don't wanna buy 1.9422. Well, anyway, sorry, I almost blew it. Um, we're not selling £1. We're selling Um, this many British pounds, that's how many pounds we have now, a million divided by those two previous numbers. So that means you have to multiply both sides of this equation. Here Yep, this one here, multiply both sides of this equation by a million divided by those two previous numbers and uh you don't have to divide, you're not dividing by this, you don't need to because you have a 1 on the left hand side now. Which is what we want, so you get end up multiplying by 1.9422. And finally get this expression here. This is how many US dollars you get. So we took our million, we divide by the first two numbers and multiplied by the 1.9422, and we do the calculation. What's the value we get? It's a little more than a million dollars. $1,159.05 as an arbitrage profit. So that's an arbitrage opportunity. Not bad, eh? And I didn't think about it too much. I just said, well, I'll, I'll sell dollars and uh buy dollars later, just go step by step, and these are the uh cash flows. Is that all right? So this is an arbitrage opportunity. This is free money. It's not a lot of money, but it's free money, and you would do this over and over again. You, you know, you, you, you had a million dollars, got rid of that, and in the end, you received, uh, an extra $1,159.05. Um So, um, so there's an arbitrage opportunity. I was I gonna say, um. There you go, and, and there's no, there are no transaction costs because we've included the bid and ask spread and so that's, that's a clean profit, fair enough. So this will, this will disappear very quickly, you know. People like the really fast, fast people with the best computers and stuff will, will find this in train, train, train, train, train, and then the prices will adjust and the opportunity disappears, uh, really quickly. Uh, my prof years ago, uh, used to say, yeah, you and I won't get the arbitrage opportunity, but somebody faster than us will. Uh, so anyway, there we go. And um that's, that's cool and um you know, possibly your tutor will find a faster way to do this, but, but at least you'll understand the uh the idea. So yes, so you can read this on your own if you want. They've got the same numbers here. You know, it's start with a million and finish with that, but I, uh, it's hard to harder to see the difference, the, the, the details. This is called triangular currency arbitrage. OK. And the last topic in this chapter, forward markets. Ready to go? So we'll take a break, uh, in about. I might be able to finish the chapter. It would be nice to wrap up, but, but 10 minutes we'll, in about 10 minutes we'll take a 10 minute break. So, um, you're right, no questions? No questions about my accent. So the Um, so we'll explain what a forward contract is, hedging future payments with foreign contract and a bit about the quotations. So what is a foreign contract? Um, it's a contract that calls for delivery of a specified amount of one currency against dollar payment at a fixed future date where the exchange rate is fixed at the time the contract is entered entered into. OK, um, the maturities are normally 30 days, 60 days, 90 days, 180 days, or 360 days for delivery, but these are, but I mean, you probably know foreign contracts are, um. They're over the counter. They're these are not exchange traded and uh, so, so you, you know, you go, it's, it's really mostly just big banks doing this for one another. They, they can be quite risky. So, um, so if you want a forward contract you have to be trustworthy. It's, it's only big banks that will trust one another for a forward contract more or less. Excuse me, and, and because you're just negotiating the deal, um, sort of ad hoc you can, you can get other details usually if you want to. OK, and it's a way of hedging against adverse currency movements, as we'll see, hopefully we'll see. OK So we're hedging a future payment with a forward contract and maybe I'll, maybe I'll go through this. Mm OK, I, I'll, I'll try it, see how this goes. I've got a few slides. Uh, I've got 3 sites here on For contracts. So, um So you know, I hope I'm not overexplaining, but, uh, and you, I think you may have seen these contracts in 2618. I've seen Ford's in 2618. Yeah, great, OK, OK, um, a bit more on foreign contracts. The forward price is chosen so that the foreign contract has zero value today, so there's no cash flow today. You know, you, you, you know, some people agree to buy the underlying asset in the future, some agree to sell it, you know, we have two counterparties. Both of them are happy with the current price. There doesn't have to be any with the forward price, there doesn't have to be any cash flow today. So the foreign price is set by, you know, supply and demand or by arbitrage, so no money changes hands today. But it is paid at the delivery date. The one who buys agrees to buy the underlying asset. That would be, uh, in our example it's it'll be pounds. They have a long position. The one who agrees to sell at the future date has a short position. So the way I remember it is, uh, you know, you think of a long goodbye and a short sell. Short sell sounds obvious. They both begin with S. Short means you're gonna sell. OK. Is this good? Let me go. Should I do the example yet? Yeah, I think I'll do a little bit more and then come back to the numbers. Um, so this is a bit, uh, this might be a bit too much. There's a bit of math here and so on, but, um, suppose the four contract matures at date T and we're gonna write E as a date T for the spot price. This will be the actual price for, uh, uh, British pound on the delivery date. This will be random. We don't know what that is. Uh, F0 is, uh, is, um, for the delivery is the foreign price that was locked in at Dayton 0. So for example, OK. Yeah, yeah. OK Uh, uh, OK, I'll, I'll do a bit more about the example. Well, you see in a minute. I, I prefer to stick with it. Sorry, I'm stubborn. Um, in our example, I'll come back to this in a minute. We're gonna take, uh, we're gonna buy a Ford Crown truck. We're gonna take a long position. We're taking a loan position that means we're going to buy, uh, we agree to buy the, uh, underlying asset at the future date for F $0. And, and, it'll be in units of the foreign currency, OK. So at date T, we're gonna pay this amount of money for in US dollars for uh the, for in British pounds. So, so that's a cash flow that we pay that out. And then, and then what you normally imagine is now that I paid that money I've um. I've got British pounds and then I'm gonna sell them on the market and I'll receive whatever the market price, the random market price in that day, so that's the random number and uh N times the random, uh, uh. Uh, exchange rate So your payoff becomes this, can you see that? So I'm, I'm paying, I'm I'm buying the assets, so I'm paying for that, and I immediately turn around and sell it, so I receive the random price and uh that's the total payoff from the long forward contract. And uh so think of this as a function of E. It's just a straight line with a positive slope. So, so if you, you know, if you plot this for different values of E, it's just a slope, positive slope going up. And I'll show you, um, we've got a graph of this a couple of slides later. There's the graph that's, that's a payoff for a long, uh, forward contract. And um no worries. So what it means if, if, uh, so on the bottom we have, you know, it's, it's, um, sort of the, the, the numbers on the bottom are the ET values of ET. And the uh on the vertical axis you get the actual um the actual payoff OK. So, so that explains why you get that upward sloping line if you like. Um, but at the same time, so that's just the foreign contract, but we also, um. In our case, in our example, we have to, um, suppose we have to pay. For in units of foreign currency. Sort of assume this is a separate transaction. That also costs um n times the uh n units of the foreign currency. So, uh, you know, we're just adding and subtracting here, but, um, what this means is, um, we get, we get this payoff from the foreign contract, this payoff, uh, from our business practises, and, and those, and, and the, the random, the random terms cancel we have a plus ET here and a minus ET here and you just lock in this number here. So that's why, that's why this works. We've locked in a payment of N times F0 dollars, um. For uh and and that's that's why it's a hedge. Anyway, And uh and so it's not, we're not saying this is the most profitable way to do it every time. But, um, it's not profit maximising necessarily, but it's reduced all uncertainty. We've locked in this cash flow and we've reduced risk. So it's risk mini it's risk minimising rather than profit maximising if you like. OK, but let's, let's look at the numbers now. Um A US company is gonna buy computer chips, they're buying computer chips from England and they will owe a million pounds in 90 days, OK. So in 90 days, um, they, they care about the uh the price of the pound. In 90 days when they owe this money, are they, do they need to buy pounds or sell pounds? How's that for a question? So, you, you see the sentence there, I'm gonna have to buy pounds or sell pounds? Anybody ready? Uh, anybody wanna say sell pounds? Anybody wanna say buy pounds? Not sure, but yeah, yes, so this is a US company. And um you have to trade, they're dealing with England, uh, they'll say, OK, I'll give you a million dollars, a million pounds in 90 days. They don't have it now. In 90, certainly they don't have it now. In 90 days, they buy a million pounds and say, here's the money. They use dollars to buy a million pounds. Here's the money I owed you. So in 90 days, they're gonna be buying a million pounds. They're exposed to the price of pounds. OK, so do they get hurt if the price of pounds goes up or down? You ready? You wanna think? OK, they're uh they're buying pounds. Uh, how many people think they get hurt if the price of the pound goes down? How many think they hurt if the price goes up? Yeah, they're hurt if the price goes up. Exactly. They're heard if the price goes up. So that's what they're worried about. This is their exposure to, uh, to currency prices. They get hurt if the price goes up, and that's why, can I, can I do that here? That's why they like this contract here because it makes money if, if the price of the currency goes up. Yeah, that's why it's a hedge. They're gonna be, they're gonna hurt if the price of the currency goes up, and this, this is a spiel I do at open days all the time. Uh, many people face, many, most, almost any firm faces, faces either interest rate risk or currency price risk or commodity price risk. So if you're a firm. Uh, we'll lose, we'll lose money if the price of the pound goes up. You can find an option in a futures contract that makes money if the pound goes up to offset that thing. So, so there are high school students out there that have heard my spiel on this. And they got it for free. Sorry, you guys, yeah, they got it for free. Um, so, so that's what, that's why we like this contract if we have to buy. Um, if we have to buy, um, Uh, by, uh, pounds in the future. OK, so, um, there's the spot price. Interesting fact. That plays no role. We don't care about today's spot price because everything's happening in the future. Today's spot price is completely irrelevant. And we're saying, look at this terminology, we're saying the company is currently short US pounds. It owes pounds for future delivery. So, so if you're, so it's sort of a fun idea. If you're long pounds, that means you've got, you own them now. If you're long them, you already own them. If you're short pounds, that means you don't owe them and you have to buy them at some date in the future. So, uh, so if you're long pounds, you worry about the, the value of the price going down. If you have to sell it in the future, you'll hurt if the price goes down, and if you're short pounds, that means you have to buy it later and you're, you're worried that the price will go up. You heard if the price goes up. Is that all right? Is it too much at once? Hope you had a nice long weekend. The king's birthday Um, OK, is that, is that OK? It is. There's, there's sort of a lot going on in a way, but this is quite, uh, quite standard. So, so the company faces, faces exchange rate risk, and the spot rate goes up in 90 days. The dollar or the, the chips goes up and vice versa. To hedge this, they buy a 90 day For contract that trades at $1.26 per pound. This will lock in the rate of $1.26 per each pound we buy. If the spot rate in 90 days is greater than that, the company has gained from the contract, if not, the company has lost from it, but either way, you end up paying, um, this amount of money regardless. So the company faces exchange rate risk. And so on Is that all right? Is that the one I wanted to show? I think this is a bit repetitive. You're offsetting your position by going long in the forward market. You're buying. That's OK and um. Mhm OK, that's good. Yes, can you see here the, uh, the gain or loss is unrelated to today's spot rate. Today's spot rate doesn't play a role at all here, but, um, but if you go back to my little math thing, um, the payoff. See the payoff, maybe I can. Uh, the payoff for the forward contract looks like this. It's, it's upward sloping, and where does it equal to zero? It equals zero when, um, the future forward forward price equals the, uh, forward rate. That's this number right there. That's 1.26. So that's the, uh, that's sort of the break even point there. And if the, uh, the price of the underlying asset goes above that, we start to make money and below that, uh, we start to lose money. And um but. Yeah, but as I say, we're, we're, we're short, um, the underlying asset, we're short euros we just have to buy it later and if you, if you do a graph for the short position, uh, you would see how they, uh, cancel. Um, so gains or losses in the forward contract are unrelated to the initial thing. Uh, this is the one. So the forward contract gain or loss exactly offsets the change in the dollar cost of the, it's not textile or it's, uh. It's um uh uh chips. And um for example, so the spot price in the pound is, it's not $1.01 dollar 20 cent, it's supposed to be $1.29. So it's gone, the price has gone higher than we had hoped. It's gone up to $1.29. Uh, so you, so when you, when you deliver your, uh, your, your payment, you have to pay $29 million. But because of our long foreign contract that has a gain of $30,000. And so you pay the $1.29 million receive $30,000 and you end up paying, it's equivalent of paying, uh, $1.26 per each pound. So the net cash flow, the final cash flow is, uh, is, is equal to um. Uh, that locked in forward price. OK. OK, we need a break, uh, so I haven't quite finished just a couple more slides about, uh. About how they're quoted, but, uh, we're making good time. Any questions before we take a break? I, I lost track of the time a bit. So let's take a 10-minute break. I'll see you at about 1:17. Thank you.

SPEAKER 1
Um, if you Mhm And the One of the shorts. So It OK You Mhm If you Have The roar for the The longer Hello. So something something. So So Shortly after Right Even if you're design. So Oh And we started by selling US dollars. And um So you sold that money and and got things you got. And was that coincide. Eventually we used that money to buy back the the the dollars we usually sold. And For Yeah They They Mhm OK. Yes, but I mean, I mean as soon as we did this, we owned, we here we owned. We own, uh, and here we own. Um Mhm Those parents. Um-hum. And we can group with the daughters. Yeah so When we convert convert these to euros then we can find the balance. Do this and uh and we get more dogs. right. Yeah, I went through that pretty quickly. Well, um Mm That OK, um It's about 10:17.

SPEAKER 0
It's been about 10 minutes and um. We'll have to get through the chapter 4 material. That we need for purchasing power parity. So, um, so I think I'll get started if you don't mind. I had a few questions during the break that I'll try to answer. Uh, I, I can see a few things I wasn't very clear about. And um And it's mostly about these slides for the forward. Foreign contracts Um OK Yeah, and they're very long, short, and so on, um. We had an example where, um, we didn't have, we didn't have pounds we needed to buy them in the future. And there could be somebody else that has pounds and they're, they're gonna have to sell them in the future. OK, so, so let's, let's compare. I can't think of a business reason off the top of my head. Thinking of we, we, we have, we have pounds and we need to, we're gonna, you know, sort of cash them in for US dollars, uh, at some point we're gonna free them up and sell them for US dollars. OK, so if you, if you have, if you, if you have pounds now, you're long pounds. If you own pounds, it's like you own an asset, and like any asset, you hurt, you, you're, you're better off if the price goes up, you're hurt if the price goes down. If you don't have the asset now and have to um buy it in the future, you're effectively short that asset. And um And, uh, and, and because you have to buy, you know, you're buying a car and, uh, you're buying a house, well, in, in 90 days' time, the price goes up, you're, you, you're disappointed, you get hurt if the price goes up and you're happy if the price goes down. So it's the opposite position for, for being, um, so, so when you own the asset, you're disappointed if the price goes down when you haven't bought it yet, you're disappointed if the price goes up. So that's the difference between a long position and a short position and um for for futures contracts a long position says I I agree to buy uh the underlying asset at some date in the future. That's what long goodbye refers to long means you're gonna buy it. And um and the payoff you get we uh we went through the logic uh the payoff we get is um I can how much of this can I delete. For the Longford contract is this thing here. It's upward sloping and um and I sort of went through the argument here for the long foreign contract you need you need to buy the asset so so you're paying for it that's the negative cash flow you're paying $0 for it as per the contract. And um and for this and in the shape of this is this uh. Is this, is this, uh, upward sloping line there? That means you agree to buy the contract in the future. Um Why, who would want, who wants this kind of thing? This is, who is it that wants to buy, um, the asset in the future? That's the person that's short the, the asset now. If you short it now, you don't wanna lock in the purchase price, uh, using a long forward. So if you're short the underlying, you hedge by going long in the forward. And uh and that gives you a constant payoff, a risk-free payoff, and, uh, I do, I've written down here the total payoff from a short forward will look, will be just the opposite. It's just the negative of the long payoff. What's this kind of uh game where one party loses the other party party wins the same amount? Do you know what that's called? Yeah, it's a zero-sum game. So, so these are zero-sum games, that's true of options and futures, the zero-sum games. So, um, so this, this means you lock in the sales price, so when you sell it. Uh, at a future date, you'll sell it and receive, um, this locked in forward price. So if you're, if you're short in the forward that locks in the, the, uh, sales price, that means you and, and the person who owns the asset now and wants to sell it in the future, I mean if, if you're long now and wanting to sell it in the future, that means you hedge it by having a short futures forward, futures and forwards, sorry. So, so it's easy to remember if you're along the underlying you hedge having a short feature forward if you're short the underlying you hedge, uh, using a long, uh, forward, but I don't know if that explained anything. I, I'm just sort of repeating what I've said before probably, but, um, but I, I did wanna clear that up about the, uh, long and short positions anyway, um, well, if you don't mind, I'll try to, uh, wrap up this chapter just and then I, I really do, it's important to finish put called. Purchasing power parity. And chapter 4. How are foreign price quoted they can't just give you the actual quoted price, but they have a similar to similar trick to what we did with PIPs. So suppose the spot rate, suppose the spot rate is this number, it ends in 31. And the Ford The foreign price for this ends in 30. So what you do is you take the um the forward price minus the spot price and that's that's 2 pips and they'll use that as a quote they'll say, well, so if you say hey what's the uh the forward price for um for Australian dollars or whatever. Um, they'll say, well, you know what the spot price is, just, just add 2 pips. The price is 2 pips. I said, OK, so it's, it's kind of a similar trick to what we saw before and then they call it a swap rate. Um, we'll see, we'll talk about swaps in chapter, in, in week 23, in week 4. But they also call this a swap rate, so this, this difference down here, they call it a swap. Yeah, so operate and it's just a quick way of writing the uh. Um, of, uh, quoting these prices. So outright or swap rate, if and it's possible for the forward rate to be below the current rate, it's possible for it to be above the current rate. If the foreign rate is above the spot rate, we say it trades at a premium. The premium, it's got a nice high price. And uh and if the 4 is below the spot rate we sell it sells it at a discount. It's discounted means it has a lower price, just a bit of terminology there, and they sometimes quote, uh, they sometimes calculate the forward premium. So you can have negative points or positive points. And to find the premium, you take the difference between forward and spot and divide by the spot. So that's, that's the only thing I mean, what do you divide by? It turns out they divide by the spot and they, then they annualize it by multiplying by 360 over the number of contract days. So in the example they had, so it was, you know, it was the, uh, the swap rate there was two pips, and what you divide by is the, um, is the number on the right, the, uh, the spot rate rather than the forward rate, and then, and then you rescale it so it becomes an annualised rate. So the forward premium is 0.11% in this example. Is that right? Sort of a simple, uh, bit of, uh, terminology and so on. Any other questions? So if not, Let's go to um Chapter 4 Parity conditions. In international finance and currency forecasting. I'm gonna skip, so I won't go through the, I mean, we, we got, oops, yeah, sorry. Get it all set up there we go. Who do these two today. Should be all right for time. Gee, I'm a bit slow. And um what are parity conditions we'll talk about the law of one price and so on, so um. Anyway, I think, I think I can skip a few slides here. Uh, if you don't mind, you can read them, we'll come back to all these things, uh, later, but I don't wanna introduce everything, uh, before we talk about them. OK But, um, but there are a number of relationships that we're interested in, and I've got a slide that I wanna, I've got a slide that I wanna show you. In my, where is this window? So this is the chapter 4, part 1, extra comments, oops, yes, uh, here it is. Um. Oh, I have another one here. OK. Uh, you saw this last week. This was, uh, chapter 2 slide. Did I lose that already? No You saw this last week. Main factors affecting exchange rates, and we have 5 factors here. And in this, in this chapter we'll look at inflation differentials and interest rate differentials at some point, and, uh, purchasing power parity is the first one. So, so that's what this chapter is about. Are these two topics. But I was gonna say a little bit about slide 8. Let's see, where are we? There we go. OK, we've got a law of one price here. So this is, this is a nice example. We even have an arbitrage opportunity here as well. I take off my. Glasses. OK, we have a firm that's a Denmark-based firm based in Copenhagen. Uh, Novo Nordisk. The AS is just their way of saying, uh, limited or, uh, or inco, you know, so it's just novo Novo Nordisk. Limited or whatever. And it's a pharmaceutical firm, but the point is that you can trade it in Copenhagen or in New York. And um because we can do these things electronically they better have the same price in the in New York and uh and Copenhagen they have to have the same price. So, um, So we're told that 11 share of Novo in in in Denmark costs, so that's the notation for the Danish kroner. 441.65 Danish kroner exchange rate is, is this number here, 6.89. That's kroner for each US dollar you buy. OK, so I just wanna make sure, you know, do, so do you multiply by 6.89 or divide by 6.89? So I hope this isn't too repetitive, but let's just do a couple of things here. What does this exchange rate mean? Um Which is the price of one. Uh, so if this, if this is the quote, it's, you know, I'll tell you it's Danish kroner for each US dollar you buy. So what would be the price of one kroner in US dollars? Is it A or B? Can you work that out? Um, is the price in US dollars. Of one croner How many people? A, how many people? B? It's B. Yeah, it is. That's B. Great. Right And the second one must be the opposite, the price of $1 in uh corners is, is a. So $1 in terms of krona, so the price of $1 is 6.89 kroner, yeah, exactly. Uh, how else could we write this? Oh, so is this equal, does this say that one Danish corner equals 6.89 US, or is it A or B? You wanna go that this, this quote here. Uh, does that equal, um, A or B? Thank you. I'm supposed to, I'm supposed to say, yes, it is, it's B. $1 and then, you know, it's price per $1. OK, great, great, great. Anything else? Let's see, uh sorry, quick. Well, I guess is this worth it? This is maybe a bit too redundant, but, but when the question is, what is the price of one Danish corner in terms of US dollars, it's, it's, I've got this on the, on the bottom. I think this is a bit repetitive, but if you try multiplying things, sometimes the point is I won't go through the details. You read it if you're curious, but sometimes, uh, you can see how, what happens with the units. This is something I learned from, from physics. The units have to, have to make sense. So if I take. This this quote. And um so the the number, so the number of Danish corner we're interested in, and if I multiply by that, what happens to the to the units they they go they're weird. Danish corners squared over US dollars, but the second one, if I divide, if I divide by 6.89, uh, the units make sense. So, so that's one way you can look at it if that helps you, um, but I do like to think of this, you know, the price of one Danish corner is, uh, 1 over 6.89. Which is what we saw just up here, um, yeah, the price of. Did I say that right? The price of one Danish corner in terms of US dollars. Yes. Is is one over it's this one here. OK. Anyway, let's, let's go back. So, um So what would one share of NVO trade in the US if the law of one price holds? So you've got to, um, you gotta, you gotta pay this many kroner. And the price of one krona is 1/6.89. So this is what the price should be if there's no uh arbitrage arbitrage opportunity, is that fair enough? And um And what if Any questions about that? So, so this is the kind of thing that you'll get quicker at over time. Uh, and what if it's not worth $65? What if, sorry. Instead of 64.1, it's worth $65. What do you do? So, uh, suppose they weren't equal, we have two choices here. Would we buy, would we buy this thing or that thing? Which do we buy and which do we sell? So do we buy, um, do we buy this thing that costs 64.10, or do we buy the thing that costs 65? How many people say we buy the one that's 64.10? How many people say the other one, right? Yes, so it's on, it's on the bottom of the line here. So you buy, you, you buy this one, you sell that one, and each time you do that, and, and this happens immediately. I mean, because we have these electronic, uh, you know, we can do this electronically every time you do this, you make 90 cents. It goes on and on. Do you know how to remember this? Do you know the, the monarch for remembering this? I have heard it before. It's called Buy low sell high. Has anybody heard that one before? I'm in Oregon. It's literally buy low sell high. I have a friend in marketing that thinks that all, all we do is walk around in finance. We walk around saying buy low, sell high. This is where we do that in arbitrage. This is exactly what we do, and it's that simple. So there you go. You heard it here first. OK OK So we have A few things to say about purchasing power parity. Let's let's go through it. We've got um absolute purchasing power parity, that is what should the current exchange rate be relative PPP is what, how should it change? So A particular good must have the same price in different countries when priced in a common currency. I mean, it, it, it, it makes sense. So, and so to, to do this. Um, the price parity means, so PH is the price of a good in terms of the home currency. PF is the price of good in the foreign currency, and it's, uh, I wrote this on the bottom. I added this on the bottom. E0 is the price of one unit of the foreign currency. Does that make sense? So if we're buying, so in our examples here. We're gonna be buying a Big Mac in the US and South Africa. Uh, a Jeep Grand Cherokee in the US and the UK, and this is, um. An iPhone in many different countries. And compare the prices in the two countries. So to do this, you take um the price in the US, take, take the price of the multiple and take the compare it to the price of the currency times the, the price of the good in a foreign country. That's, that's what we want to compare and we expect those to be the same, they should be the same. And the nice thing to do right away is just solve for um. A lot of stuff there. So for this right here. The, uh, the price of the foreign currency should be the price of, um, the, the, the, the, uh, commodity in the home country divided by the price in the foreign country. And we use this over and over again. This small insight is what we use for the rest of this, uh, chapter. And um And use and I'll just say this on this slide, PH and PF represent the price of an individual good, but that could be, could represent the overall price level or price index usually given by the consumer price index, the CPI. You probably heard about this before. So if you take returns on a CPI are equal to inflation. So this is about inflation, we're talking about inflation here. It measures changes in price, yeah, OK. Uh, I can't, I have to finish this. This is really something. But, um, anyway, in this case, um, They did a calculation. You can look at these. They have, uh, this is from 22004. They have this is for the Big Mac. That's a famous thing to compare Big Macs in different countries. They have these two prices. All you do is take the ratio, and that's supposed to tell you the, uh, exchange rate, and, um, it doesn't work. Turns out the, uh, the rand is undervalued. And it's not a big deal, but if it's undervalued, it means that The Big Mac in South Africa is, is, um. Yes, so if this, if this number here is too high, that denominator is, is too, is too low. So Big Macs in uh South Africa seem to be cheap and it may be because of uh wages in South Africa. That's, that's a kind of a. Uh, one of the, uh. Easiest explanations in this case it's just the opposite. Take the ratio of the two prices. Uh, I think this is, uh, I think this is, these are real numbers. I think this is just a hypothetical example here. In this case it goes the other way, um, the, um. The British pound is uh. is over, is underpriced. So that means that the numerator here. is higher than it should be. And that may be because they have higher wages, for example. To makes sense. So it doesn't hold, but, um, and these are examples we have these iPhones for all these different countries. It's kind of fun. You can stare at it, uh, in, in prices in US dollars, in the US right down to Turkey, and, um, and in Turkey, it's more than twice the price of, uh, the iPhone in, um. In the US OK But, and, um, but, but we still use PPP, we still use it, it's still important, especially for long term, it's important in the long term. You don't use it from day to day, you know, um, people doing using algorithmic trading aren't gonna look at PPP, but it's good for, um, long term, uh, uh, uh, projections and so on. OK What happens over time? Uh, this is, here's relative PPP, very fundamental. Um Uh, so we have, you know, we have the current today's spot exchange rate. This is our expected spot exchange rate in the future. And um IH is the home inflation rate, so I is an inflation rate, no, not an interest rate. Don't get confused about that. NIF is the foreign inflation rate. You see how this comes about? Um, it's kind of obvious, but um. Yep So, um, so if this, so if this, if this holds at date zero and if it continues to hold, we just see what these prices do over time. The price on the top grows with inflation, the price on the bottom grows with the price on top goes with the home inflation rate. The price on the bottom grows with the foreign inflation rate. And you, when you, uh, factor out the two initial prices, you just get, you just get this expression, it's the initial exchange rate times uh times these terms here. Anything else? OK. Um, Mhm, so, so it's, it's pretty intuitive and that's fundamental. So if inflation in the US is 5% and inflation in in Japan is only 1%, what happens? So people in Australia see that prices are going up in the US, US goods become more expensive because of their inflation. So we switched to buying goods in in uh. In uh, in Japan and if that means we start. Buying in to buy the goods we have to buy in. And when you buy something, uh, the yen increases against the US dollar. And it should increase by roughly 4%. To, to offset, to offset this difference here. Is that OK? So, um, So anyway, uh, I have, again, I'm not sure if this will be helpful. They, we've got this example here. Um 16 just sorry. 16. 0 yeah, oh, so still size 16. Just, just look at these numbers here, 5% and 1%. So, so what happens to the exchange rate? Over time Um If, if it, if it If it grows by 5% in the US and uh only 1% in Japan, then you know when you do the calculation, it's growing by, you know, 3.96%, which is approximately 4%. OK. So, so, um, So, um, yeah, so if, if there's a difference in inflation, this shows you what is supposed to happen to the exchange rate. Exchange rate is supposed to increase according to this equation in a simple equation. OK, uh, we plug in the numbers, so all we're doing here is taking the the starting point. And uh plugging it in and finding what what the exchange rate should be in 5 years. OK. And, um, and it leads to this graph here. Which is um we're close, we're very close to the end of. And don't know why, so we've got, uh, we've got this. So why does this hold? to me that came up kind of abruptly, so um. So I've got a way of explaining that. I hope you don't mind. Um, so just a couple, few more slides. No, this is it. This is the left aside here. Um, so I have a math result first of all, so this will look pretty abstract, but it's surprisingly useful for what we're doing over the next. Couple of uh lectures. This is a fact. If, if A times X is close to zero, then that 1 + X over 1 + Y, um. You know, you know, if 1 + X or 1 + Y equals 1 + A Y, then, well, anyway, sorry. OK. So AA is defined by this. And this number is small, and this shows that 1 + X over 1 + Y minus 1 is approximately x minus Y. So that's a nice approximation. Trust me, we'll use it next week. And so we have here we've got, we've got sort of returns on on the um on the exchange rate, the final rate minus the initial divided by the initial, that's like a return on the on this if it were a price that would be a return. So why does it equal um. IH minus IF. So this is again just a very little explanation here. Let's calculate this return. Uh, I, I just factored out the initial value. Um, it uses ET ET there, it's getting messy. And ET ET is equal to this thing right here. The initial value of of for the currency multiplied by this is just 11 period ahead. T is equal to 11 plus IH 1 plus IF. And when you factor out, you see that the, the. can I, can I do that? The E0 terms cancel everywhere and you get this expression here and according to the above result here, that's approximately IH minus IF. So that's, that's kind of, kind of stunning really. Returns on the exchange rate should be approximately given by the difference between the home inflation rate and the foreign inflation rate. And that's what we're seeing in these, these diagrams here. So, so to me that just came out, came out of nowhere, but now you, now you see a bit about where it comes. Uh, and, um, and it is a straight line. So, so on the, the horizontal axis we have the difference in the inflation rates, and they're trying to predict sort of how the, uh, currency rates will change. And um it's just a couple more slides here and then a bit about empirical evidence. So for example, this is the wording here is a little bit, a little bit strange, but um if, if, if US and Japanese inflation are both 2%, that means you're at this point in the diagram here, um, uh, you know, IH minus IF is equal to 0 and uh the price shouldn't move or the uh the the price of the currency shouldn't move. But if inflation goes to 5% instead of 2%, it's 5%, so I minus IF is 3%, then we're up here. We're up at this point here And um and this return should increase by 3%. So, so this, um, this number here should grow by 3%. So that's the uh that's relative PPP in a nutshell you know once you once you, you believe this equation, it, it kind of follows quite nicely. And so it gives us predictions and um. And the and uh we have 2 sides of 2 sides of the empirical evidence, and then I'll let you go. It does not hold in the short run. Exchange rates, uh, change too quickly. Prices, you can't change prices nearly as quickly, and exchange rates electronically just change constantly. Um, and so there's no way, uh, you, you, you can't really expect it to hold, uh, in the short term. Uh, yeah, different, different countries construct different price indices. Uh, as well, and, and, and the price indices don't include non-traded goods and services like haircuts and even land. It doesn't include land. But it does hold in the long run. So, so that's, that's the argument. So for making forecasts and so on, it's still good. So in the long run, so you got average annual change in relative purchasing power. Or average change in exchange rate. Um, it's pretty close to a straight line over, uh, over the long haul. And um. And there's even this other slide, it's not quite as convincing, but they look at, uh, see, I'll just look at the graph. This, this blue line is PPP exchange rate, so the calculated exchange rate per US dollar, and the other is the actual exchange rate, uh, per US dollar for different currencies, Australia, Canada, Eurozone, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. And, um, some of them really follow pretty well. Switzerland, you can see the downward slope really nicely. The, the blue line is, is smoother because it's all sort of, you know, you don't, uh, measure, um, inflation very quickly. I mean, you don't have daily measures of inflation, but the, the grey line, you know, there's a lot of volatility in the actual uh currencies prices. Um, so you do see, you know, I don't know, it's, they're not totally convincing sometimes, but, uh, but, um, a lot of them are flat, seats, so there's no, ultimately there was, there wasn't too much movement in that one, and you get a flat line, but, uh, but you do get a few that, that look sort of believable. So, so it's not dramatically effective and, uh, you wouldn't use it for short, for short term, but people still use PPP. It's quite fundamental. In, um, sort of for long term forecasting and issues like that. OK, so that's it. So, um, so, um, I'm a lot slower than I expected, but, um, so next. Should I do this? So next week we've got to go back and it shouldn't take too long, but um we've gotta go back and um do the first few slides of chapter 6 and then we'll finish chapter 4. There's a lot of nice stuff in chapter 4. So, um, so anyway, thanks for your patience. Very good. So I'll see you, uh, see you next week.

SPEAKER 1
one. Oh.

SPEAKER 2
Let What See the other measures.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah I Yeah, um.

SPEAKER 2
Oh yeah, sure practise Um So, um Mhm I And

SPEAKER 1
then probably. much. Because um you said that. Yeah. see So So.

SPEAKER 2
2 years.

SPEAKER 1
For Yeah I don't see that. There's no problem, Mhm Yeah And here. Mhm please. Oh, I'm not really sure, but, uh, he has the, uh, election in charge, I think it's. That's a good question, but, uh. No, I, Just. I It's Um, I have no information. I. another Yeah, I Um, I forgot to talk to my wife. I was one possibility is. But the constitution So I can. Because OK, so, uh, let's say uh, Yeah So I'm just. I.

SPEAKER 2
I actually I, I, yeah, so.

SPEAKER 1
You know But um. think. I'm just gonna keep the question Thank you.

SPEAKER 2
By the way, Mark, we can't.

SPEAKER 0
Oh, Oh, I'll have to check. I'm sorry. Fari didn't say anything last week. Uh, Professor Masurian didn't mention it last week.

SPEAKER 1
I OK I No the to drivers.

SPEAKER 2
I What? How dare you? How could you do this to me. I The highest to make all Then why would you help me? Why was I kindness and gratitude. Just is That For our particles and more negative. Erosion. What's Please, I 10 5 a.m. to listen. that's forward. Oh. I do have a doctor. OK, Mars on. I What do you mean? Have you Shut up, it is good. That this the coursework project. They have the most I. I think it's my time now. I Huh. I Are you ready? Oh yeah, it's, it's fun though. This is like 22. OK, it's OK.
