SPEAKER 0
Business finance. Are you excited to do this course? I'm sure you are. Most of you obviously would like to know more about international business finance, and I have to say I personally have been always very passionate about global finance. And so I do have great interest in Global finance, financial stability, global financial resilience, and of course the role of multinational corporations. So that you could get a very brief big picture of what we are doing in this course. The course basically is training our great students to prepare themselves. To develop capacity and skills to become part of global basically multinational corporations over time. In other words, the skills that you acquire in this course will assist you to become, there is no guarantee, of course, but I know from my past experience and many, many students. Decades that you see the students will become basically part of the management team of multinational corporations because not only this particular course, but this particular course in addition to everything else that you are doing will be a very significant part of overall skills that you develop. And I say that with great confidence due to over years of experience teaching this particular course. And similar courses in this school. Anyway, we initially start today with multinational corporations. In other words, why suddenly we have got big multinational corporations around the world? You know, I'm going to tell you we didn't have it 30 years ago, 40 years ago. And so this is a big picture of knowing multinational corporations, Chapter 1, and then we move to the more mechanical part of the lecture for the next basically 4 weeks. In other words, we start by telling students how do we define the price of, say, American dollar against the euro as a currency, how do we define the price of the Japanese yen against the US dollar. And what determines the exchange rate between two countries? What factors would define basically this change in exchange rate all the time? I don't need to go into detail of what I'm going to say to you today about Chapter 2, but Chapter 2 gives you a great understanding of the way exchange rates between currencies and countries are set. And why these changes will keep changing over time, all the time, virtually every minute, but you get a settlement time, you know, 5 p.m., 4 p.m., etc. depending on the time you have. And of course from there after this week, which is a very important lecture I believe, to give you really the foundation of what we're doing, then we move to other important issues in the context of the actual foreign exchange market. What are the forces of foreign exchange market, how financial market analysts play in financial markets, how they price currencies, how they sell, how they buy. And many facets of this buy and sell of foreign exchange market as part of Chapter 6. And then we move to relationships of foreign exchange market as well as the actual exchange rate between two countries versus certain fundamentals. What's the relationship, for instance, we say between the actual change in exchange rate and inflation between two countries, say US versus Eurozone? What are the forces of interest rate differential between the US and Eurozone which affects the exchange rate? What are the forces which could set the forward rate as opposed to the spot rate? The spot rate is the current price of exchange rate today. Right now, future forward means the future rate where someone is pricing it, they feel like for you. And then they will sell, for instance, euro currency for this particular forward rate in 3 months' time or 4 months' time period. And so various relationships, interest rate parity, international fisheries effect, purchasing power parity. A number of these relationships will be defined as part of Chapter 4, which is a highly important chapter for this course, and I strongly recommend the students to look at all these relationships between price, exchange rate, inflation, interest rate, forward rate, spot rate, etc. etc. And of course beyond that we get into some hedging instruments, options, futures. If you basically would like to run multinational companies, you need to know that multinational companies are exposed to many, many risks all the time because they basically swimming in the ocean, the global economy. Exchange of one currency goes up, the other currency goes down. There are risks in one country. There is less risk in another country. How do you hedge yourself again? Those chapters on options and futures and also interest rate and exchange rate swaps are a very important part of this course. And Dr. David Caldwell will be covering these materials in weeks 23, and 4. Beyond these materials which are the foundation of the course, then students are ready to say, OK, you taught us all these technical issues in the 1st 4 weeks, and I highly recommend you to attend tutorial please go through. The questions of tutorial, even if we didn't give you mark to attend the class, I highly recommend you to understand all the questions. And of course you can rely on the PowerPoints of the lectures, mainly for your learning. And the good news is that the textbook, you have a textbook where you always can go back. And see the bigger picture of what we cannot simply cover in one or two hour lecture. It gives you the context of what we are covering and I always like to allow students to just have this opportunity of seeing the bigger picture context of basically what we are saying if you want to get into a deeper understanding of the issues. And of course from week 5 until week 10, with the exception of week 6, we look at then the tools that you have learned in terms of the way multinational corporations' business has to manage, for instance, what will happen if there is a change in interest rate, real interest rate. What will happen if there is a change in exchange rate on business activities of multinational companies? They are working in 40 countries, sometimes 100 countries. Had the exchange rate fluctuations, interaction between exchange rate, interest rate, and other forces are going to influence, for instance, economic exposure of multinationals. Or transaction of multinationals. They're talking about billions of dollars of balance sheet. How when the dollar, for instance, goes up or down slightly could affect the transaction exposures of multinationals which are working around the world virtually. And you can see the complexity of that of course for their modeling how they cater for Japanese yen, Euro zone, US dollar, Chinese currency. Japanese currency, etc. etc. And of course beyond that we look at the actual capital market, global capital market, how multinationals go and raise capital, how they get the cheapest capital for their future investment. Beyond that, we look at cost of capital and capital budgeting of multinationals. You know about cost of capital and capital budgeting in other courses you've done foundation course, maybe corporate finance, or we look at it from the perspective of an international organization, multinational company. Where they are exposed to different types of risk premium, exposure to financial risk in different parts of the world. How do they set up the cost of capital? How do they set up the international capital budgeting? So that will be other elements that you see the application of everything you will be doing in the 1st 4 weeks in practice. And finally we end up with management of multinational companies globally with the issue of how to have effective tax, minimize the costs between their subsidiaries. How to basically maneuver from one country to another when there are different regulations or political risk to maximize basically maximize their profit. So that will give you a full picture by the time we get to weeks 9 and 10. So that's just a big picture of, if you like, materials that we will be covering in this course. In addition to that, I just want to say that there is a UNSW pass that the students are encouraged to attend. Remind me, I want to show that PowerPoints to me. One of you should remember towards the end, and I highly recommend you to attend to support, and full information is also on. OK, with that in mind, if you don't mind, I'll start with the first chapter, which is a big picture chapter if you like, just to look at why suddenly all these companies became so-called multinational, why the world is so interconnected, why supply chains became so important, why there is so much risk if there is one major hiccup in one part of the world, multinational corporations have to be ready for this kind of thing. OK, with that in mind. We live in a global world. MNCs, we call it multinational corporations, MNCs, and internationalization, consequence of competition, global competition, value of trade, etc. I just want to say that one thing that you need to note that indeed if you know a little bit of history from your high school, I don't know, or some other sources. Globalization. Technically has started in the 19th century. And so-called transport, telecommunication, movement of capital, movement of people traveling, migrating from the US to Australia, to other parts of the world, etc. etc. That means the world has become interconnected and with the coming of technology in the 1980s, 19990s, 2000s, and now beyond the internet. The world has become far more interconnected than ever we have experienced in the past generations, and your generation can see it right in front of you now. They had to deal with AI and the power and application of AI. And so you are not surprised then to know that a company which has started in a particular country like Australia or America for maybe decades suddenly they think well they can actually export and indeed go and produce in other parts of the world. That's the crux of the matter. It's just the forces of technological changes and many other related technological changes which made companies to Think globally rather than nationally or locally. That's the gist of all the issues that I'm going to cover, so you get the big picture. And of course here the global marketplace is not for amateur, for instance. In other words, once you are living in an interconnected world, anything could go wrong. You could lose your competitiveness because a new technology suddenly outdate your technology. And one of the examples was Nokia, once the world leader in cell phones. Was displaced by Apple and Samsung just in a few years. I mean they are some of the consequences of globalization and risk associated with that. What you will see here is I'm not going to look at every point, but it's showing headquarters in France with a large presence of large US presence, in other words, US multinational companies. You can just see some of the names. Headquarters in Germany with a large presence of multinational companies from the US and so on. And in China, the same thing. You see a significant number of multinational companies there and these basically brands are part of our psyche if you like. We've seen them in many parts as part of our life if you like. Another dimension of these issues could be, for instance, in the case of Barbie, to look at the interconnectedness, supply chain, and multinationalization of production if you like. It's designed in California. Parts and clothing originates from Japan, China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, etc. Assembly assemblage is done in Mexico. Customers, you can see North America 60%, Europe 25%, Latin America, etc. etc. That's just to give you an idea of the way products are produced and you know them. I mean, I don't need to repeat some of these issues. In the case of Hollywood movies, film industry again it's highly multinational. You look at producer is from British American, director is British, cinenography is Dutch, Swedish, da da da da da goes on and on and on. In other words, and that is not surprising. You come to this university, you can see various academics from different backgrounds. You go to actual multinational companies, you look at the number of the staff from different nationalities, unbelievable. It's so-called United Nations of the world. You see representation from everywhere, and I think the same issues apply. This particular example is very beautiful in the sense that it's very tangible. You look at Boeing 787. We say it's made in America, but when you look at its parts, for instance, some parts in Italy, Australia, Japan, Korea, Japan, Canada, etc. UK, Sweden, so everyone is contributing something to this very successful aircraft. With that in mind, I just want to slow down a little bit and just tell you that everything that you have seen so far is what we already know it if you like. But as I started this lecture on this topic, the main issue you need to note is the actual so-called multinational corporations which emerge happened in the late 19th century. Earlier centuries in 16th century, 17th century, 18th century, we used to have sort of very specific multinational companies. One of them was called British East India Company. They were focusing on Asia, in particular India, Dutch East India Company. They were focusing on India, Indonesia. Southeast Asia, South Africa, etc. supported by the government and the same thing Hudson Bay Company from the UK for the same reason. But basically the first two, in effect, then closed down in the 19th century. There have been corruption. There have been a mix of politics and business, etc. etc. So they are not part of more than multinational corporations. But the actual multinational corporation, as I put at the bottom of this page 1868, 1870, beginning of modern multinational companies and now where we are compared to late 19th century, unbelievable changes. So when we talk about what is an MNC, an MNC is operating with its subsidiaries all over the world depending on their size. If you take McDonald's, it's everywhere, if you like. If you look at Toyota, they are in substantial parts of the world. If you look at the same thing, Mercedes-Benz, you see them in certain parts of the world. And of course it depends on the nature of the business. They can set up their headquarters, for instance, HSBC, one of the most international banks in the world, they are in 10,020 countries. Amazing, isn't it? 120 countries. It could be more. This was the one I checked at some years ago. So that gives you an idea of even multinational banks in the scheme of what we are talking about. So in other words, the point is what differentiates MNCs from other firms engaging in international business is globally coordinated allocation of resources by single centralized management. And yet in each country these subsidiaries have got their own independence. They are not always everything has to be centralize, but the subsidiaries have got their own autonomy, but they still have to work with the headquarters in many facets. MNCs by country in different continents of the world and Fortune of Global 500 companies by top 10 countries in August 22. You can see the countries from China, US, Japan, Germany, France, United Kingdom, etc. etc. They are the countries which generate basically the largest multinational companies. But one thing you need to note is in the case of the US, American MNCs comprise less than 1% of US companies in America, but they still count for 23% of total private industry employment, 21% of GDP, bigger than 50% of exports, 70% of research and development. In other words, that gives you an idea of the concentration of the most successful companies in America, in China, in Europe. They're all the same, basically. And that's, and you all often students aspire to work for multinational companies. And so what I did, I just put the top 20 largest MNCs by market capitalization. That's the latest information. This is not surprising. AI technology has captured the imagination of the world and industry. You can see Alphabet, Apple, Microsoft, Nvidia, Amazon, Meta, and Saudi Aramco, which is a petroleum in this case, Badcom, Telstra, etc. etc. and then the list goes on. The rest you can see JPMorgan, for instance, one of the major banks, is one of the top. JP. Morgan is a very influential investment bank in America and many other parts of the world, so that's the latest information. And if you wish to look at it in more detail, you can look at this PowerPoint. I've added also something about top US corporations amongst the top multinationals. This one's not easy to update it up to 24. Investment rate data doesn't come basically usually 2 or 3 year gap. But nevertheless, what is interesting is if you look at this is the lesson from this list is Chevron, ExxonMobil, Microsoft, Johnson and Johnson, what you see is you look at sales, the foreign and percentage. In other words, this part of the foreign in terms of percentage it's very significant. And foreign percentage, which is this column assets again is significant. In other words, multinationals do have significant interests in a successful global economy. They don't want to have political risks. They don't want to have geopolitics. They don't want to have surprises, oil price shocks, all kinds of things we see from time to time. They have global interests beyond where they come from. That's the lesson from that graph. Otherwise it's not a big issue. MNCs and internationalization. Why corporations, internationals measured internationalization, how firms become MNCs? Why multinational companies a company becomes multinational. That's a good question. Would they have born to become multinational or they became multinational due to, as I said, technological interconnectedness and many other issues. But what was their strategy? That's the issue. First, one thing you need to know. Is that multinationals, when we talk about, they are not one particular type of companies. You've got all kinds of companies which became multinationals for the specialization they make. The first one before I get to these ones is banks. You've got JPMorgan, Citigroup. Deutsche Bank. So these banks, they started national, but they had to follow their global customers. Their own multinational companies from the US, for instance, General Motors, for instance. When General Motors went and established in Europe, American banks followed their customer, in this case General Motors, to supply them banking services. They established branches in Europe. So that's one size, one type of multinational companies called the banking sector. But in terms of the more hard, if you like, industrial issues, raw materials is one of the oil companies. Chevron, ExxonMobil, not all aromatics exist domestically. Oil, metals, minerals, and you see them BHP, for instance, in Australia and other companies find new markets. This was another category of multinationals where you are successful, for instance, as a company, McDonald's is one example. Coca-Cola is another example. They would say. Why not just producing products in other parts of the world? It's cheaper. Labor is cheaper, and I've got the magic product. People will buy it, so they become multinational because there are economist scared to move out of the country and reduced cost is the same issue where sometimes, for instance, in Hong Kong, they get much better tax rate. In Singapore they get much better tax rate. They go to the Bahamas, Bermuda. If we get a chance towards the end of this lecture, I'll talk about tax havens where multinationals use. That's part of the last chapter or last topic in this course, but they find it more economical to set up their headquarters in other parts of the world. And not only for that, for sometimes regulatory benefits in a particular country where they offer them, they will move from their headquarters, they add, if you like, office to other parts of the world. So there are various factors involved in this case. I've already said that I don't go into detail of that. Why MNCs have expanded since 1970s and 1980s. 1 question is that, as I said to you, multinational companies started in. Multinational companies emerged in. Where is the switch for the air con? I can see it's getting cold. It wasn't here actually. It's alright, uh. Am I right? So you guys are cold? Is that what it is? But I can see it's actually working, so it should be OK. Um, anyway, Back to the issue, I said to you in the 19th century MNCs was started, but multinational companies weren't as expanded around the world until virtually the 1960s, 1970s, and even from the early 1980s where you see many countries, for instance, in China. China is one of the largest recipients of foreign capital. Multinationals basically poured into China from the 1980s onwards. And in India, the same thing. There has been a shift in the way regulations in domestic economies have been set and the way they wanted to induce multinational companies to find their country, whether it's China, India, Brazil. Even Australia, we have had the same challenge to make the environment in Australia or China, India, and other countries competitive, encouraging, conducive for investment. And then multinational companies or companies started expanding their business. In some cases they became even greater multinationals because suddenly you have access to more than 1 billion population consumers. You go to India, you go to China, unbelievable market access, and they started exporting back from China and India, particularly China, back to the US. So that's the dynamic, if you like, loophole of some of the issues with regard to flexibility in the market. Um, one of the things you note is the stock of worldwide FDI. Uh, let me, uh, just, uh, say one thing here. Um. This graph, he says annual US foreign direct investment inflows and outflows. One of the things which is very important to note is. As multinational companies start investing, they have foreign direct investment FDI in China, India, etc. The figures that you see here in terms of billions, you see annual US foreign direct investment at and in, going to America and also American companies going overseas. So that's just the light blue is FDI in the US, dark, dark color if you like is US direct investment overseas. This is one which is annual, but over the years, if you start in 1980 and you continue on until 2025, imagine the amount of accumulation of assets of multinationals outside their own country, America, outside America, outside Europe, and now China outside China if you like. And so for that reason this graph it says a stock of worldwide FDI matters. Stock, in other words, stock is accumulation of annual flows and initially obviously capital they had, and that you can see it's now we're talking about $6.6 trillion in 2022 and it's roughly about $7.3 billion in 2024 so that you get an idea of the size of these factors, these forces if you like, the size of capital moving from one place to another. The next question then is, um. How do you become multinational? So the way you become multinational is basically you are exporting fares, for instance, as General Motors or Toyota from Japan. General Motors from America to the rest of the world, then you start creating sales subsidiary as you can see there. Or you can issue licensing, but let's just focus on sales subsidiary where you can become distributor of, if you like, General Motors or Toyota in different parts of the world. Then you have to create service facilities because people are buying your goods, your product, distribution system you have to set up. And then eventually after a while, some years, you realize sometimes of course the decision doesn't need to be slow. They find the opportunity. They have to be in Indonesia. They have to be in Malaysia. There is no time to waste if you like, but the process is eventually end up with overseas production, and that's the final, if you like, advanced phase to give you an idea of that. There is here an example of a French company which became multinational, started in 1926, now is one of the largest oil field service companies with $33 billion in revenue. However, the world is much faster than when they started in 1926. These days you can become a multinational company within virtually one or two years, and so you shouldn't underestimate the impact of technology and many other forces. With that in mind, I just want to say that once you have multinational companies, then you have to say, well, I am like a big ship, a big fish or a shark in the ocean. So now. I have to watch myself. I'm swimming in the ocean, and what's the ocean here? An interconnected global economy that there is a risk, say now, right now, examples Middle East oil crisis, if you like. There is oil shock. Suddenly many companies have been affected directly and indirectly as a result of oil shock. And so that is just one of the examples. When COVID-19 arrived, it was a different story. When there was the global financial crisis 2008, 2009, it was the same challenge in different settings if you like. And so therefore that's the purpose of this textbook if you like or this course. What we're trying to do is to say now you know multinational corporations, you know how they operate, but don't forget the main issue or one of the key factors is how do you deal with financial risk, how do you deal with financial resilience. These are the challenges they have to face exchange rate risk. Future exchange rate is unknown to them. Is the American dollar going up or down? Is the interest rate in the US going up or down? What's the impact on interest exchange rate, etc. Interest rate, inflation, economic activities, hence revenues, costs unknown. Different regulations, restrictions on capital mobility. In other words, sometimes they don't allow multinationals to go in a particular country. Sometimes you go to, say, a particular country in Latin America, they don't allow you to transfer your money back home. How do you deal with these kind of issues? Political risk, risk that foreign governments will directly interfere with or terminate MNC operation. The same thing I've just said to you. There have been cases where suddenly the government says we don't like this country's companies. And therefore, because we don't like this country, we don't like the companies of that country. Off you go, or assets are basically expropriated. Risk that foreign politics or policy will affect operations labor strikes, conflict, etc. etc. So these are some of the issues that you need to take into account as part of this process. Then I placed this question how the rest of this course prepares you to develop the knowledge and the skills to be part of the management team of an MNC in the future? And I've started the lecture on this basis, basically, and all I'm just trying to say is basically the different chapters of this textbook. Very systematically designed through a special program in tutorial that I highly recommend students to participate to basically build their learning blocks and then apply them in the second part of the course. That's the basic crux of the matter. One of the issues that, uh, OK, Chris, let me just bear with me for a second. If you don't mind, there is a section consequences of global competition. Maybe I'll just say very briefly, I might come back to that after I finish chapter two because I am more focused on chapter 2 today. Apart from what I've just said to you now, there are some consequences of globalization foreign competition, perceived job loss, perceived wage erosions. You know better than I do the global politics of the world and the global economy of the. Nations are all debating about national interests, national industrial development, as opposed to globalization, free market, free trade, etc. etc. and this debate is ongoing. That's the bottom line, and it has has had its own evolution. Sometimes the globalization was heaven. In recent days or recent years, globalization is a curse because people are losing their jobs. Nations are losing their capacity for their own national interests. I mean when you look at every story, they all have from their perspective very convincing, and you know where they come from. Once you know where they come from, you can appreciate what they are saying. So this debate is ongoing. Let me, however, stop this particular point, and what you are seeing here is the perspective of the textbook that you have, basically, and I would like to take you to the next very important part of this week's lecture, and that is chapter 2. OK, so bear with me. Are you still awake, by the way? Yes, good, good. Excellent. So let me pause for a second and then I start basically chapter 2. I will give you a break a bit later, but let me just start and get the foundations right about Chapter 2. So the first part of this lecture being big picture, know why, for instance, you look at the textbook that you have, Shapiro, by the way, is an online version of that. It says Multinational Financial Management. So you know what is multinational financial management because we know multinational companies, then we need to manage their financial affairs. That's the title of the textbook, very very clever, elegant title which captures the essence of what we cover basically in general. So then the next question here is, So let's come to the mechanical part of the course, and that is The first question we ask is how do we define exchange rate between US and Eurozone. So the price of basically a euro is x number of units of US dollars, but how does, for instance, €1 is equivalent to 1.2 US calculated. How do we know it's not 1.1 or 1.3 or even 095, for instance, US dollar versus €1? So there are mechanisms. There are processes. At the same time, I just want to tell you this is very important. We need to define exchange rate against each other. So for instance, how many units of US dollar will buy one unit of euro if you like? How do we write the exchange rate notation? And how do we understand some of these notations throughout the course, basically, and that is very important. So let me, however, start again slowly if you like some of the key issues, and then I'll come to more specific mechanical parts of exchange rate determination if you like. So exchange rate basics, calculating exchange rates, main factors affecting exchange rates, the role of central banks in currency values, fundamentals of central bank intervention, the equilibrium approach to exchange rate. So these are some of the themes that basically we will cover, and I think I generally I probably will stop after the fundamentals of central bank intervention. And I've highlighted that the rest, not necessarily in a red collar on PowerPoints are not necessarily examinable. Exchange rate basics. What are the exchange rates? Exchange rate notation. Base currency and the reference currency. What is base currency when we are dealing with, say, US dollar versus euro, and which one is called reference currency. You need to master these definitions. Exchange rate systems are some exchange rate flexible, change every day, every minute. Some are fixed, and computing prices of goods in foreign countries the way it's done. To start with, basically, what are exchange rates? So exchange rate is the price of one nation's currency in terms of another nation's currency. OK. The price of one nation's currency in terms of another nation's currency represents the cost of exchanging one currency for the other or purchasing one currency using the other. For instance, here, just look at example of prices. You have one loaf of bread is $3.95. 1 gallon of milk is 3.79 cents. One pound of beef is $14. But then one British pound is 1.65 cents. One Swiss franc is $1.17. So it gives you an idea of the way you price a particular commodity. You price also a currency as a commodity, if you like, as if it's a commodity. And my best example often is that I always say for students to appreciate, so the way you, for instance, price of orange, now winter is coming, weather is getting cold. So the price of orange goes up because there is more demand for people to have more vitamin C component fruits and fruits, and orange is basically in higher demand. So as more people are buying and consuming oranges, the price of orange goes up. If for instance there is news that apple, which was produced 3 months ago, is no longer good, something was happening on the farm, da da da da, different reasons, people will try to avoid, for instance, consumption of apple. What will happen to the price of apple? The price of apple goes down or depending on, you can look at it in a seasonal way. Certain foods are bought more in a particular season. Sometimes the foods are not on demand because it's not the right season. So as you see, orange demand for orange, price for orange goes up and down. The price of the US dollar versus euro could go up and down accordingly depending on demand and supply. The same thing for the euro, basically the same thing for the Japanese yen, the same thing for the Australian dollar. They are as if they are another commodity. And later on I will tell you when we talk about central banks, certain currencies like the US dollar, British pound, pound sterling, Japanese yen, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, Chinese currency these days, certain currencies are treated as if they are a commodity. They want people to keep them as if they are holding gold. Because there is a value for it. There is an intrinsic value for these major currencies of the world, and they are global currencies, if you like, for that reason. So that gives you an idea of when we say 1 pound or 1 kg of. Beef is $14 but one British pound is 1.65. It gives you an idea of your purchasing power in your country if you are, for instance, in England. One pound can buy $1.65 US dollars. And one Swiss franc can buy $1.17. That gives you an idea of the way you can visualize an exchange rate, the exchange between two currencies. And so the exchange rate is determined by supply and demand. Exchange rates can be traded on foreign exchange market for a spot or forward future delivery. That's exchange rate supply and demand defines the price. Now pay attention to the next 2 slides very carefully. Exchange rate notation market convention. Exchange rate can be quoted using different conventions. For instance, generally in market convention, if you say A over B means the number of units of currency B, the number of units of currency B per unit of currency A. Under this convention, a currency called A is base currency, and currency B is called reference currency. OK, so we're looking at x number of bees versus 1 unit of a. That's the notation, exchange rate notation, for instance, for example, because we are in Australia, we are used to basically hearing this particular way of expressing. The value of the Australian dollar. We say Australia US dollar is equals 0.7166. What does that mean? This means yesterday or today or just a few days ago, $1 was buying 0.7166 American dollars basically. So in this case, Australian dollar is the base currency and US dollar is reference currency. OK. So there is no issue, but that's not the only way you can express the value of two currencies. That's the issue you need to appreciate. And what I want you to appreciate is that the way we basically define the exchanges between one currency and another is slightly different to this particular way, and that is. Exchange a notation. However, a number of publications, including textbooks such as the main textbook in this course, Shapiro, use a different notation. What does that mean? Different notations? It's giving you exactly the same outcome but a different way of expressing it. In the textbook, A. Divide by b if you like a against b means the number of units of a currency versus one unit of currency B. If that's the case, under this convention, B is base currency. In other words, base is one currency, 1. One unit of B base currency against a reference currency x number of reference currencies. That's the definition reference currency x number against base currency, which is one unit of that currency. So how do you express it? For example, Australia versus US exchange rate is quoted 1.3955. This means $1 will buy $1.395. In other words, you can write it. Generally you see this is how you see it in different publications, including this textbook. $1.3955 buys $1. Why $1? Because the base currency is always 1 against x units of other currencies. So in this case $1 buys 1.3955. The US is the base currency and Australian dollar is the reference currency. To avoid confusion, this course follows the textbook notation that is AB means number of units of A per unit of 1 per unit of B. So that is basically the notation we will be using. Just bear with me, I will provide you examples and clarify it further. At the same time, again, you need to know two things. One is we do not have a good Australian textbook written only for Australian students. Who are always used to 7571 Australian American dollars equivalent to $1 and all Australian discussions generally the textbooks in international finance, because the course is even called international business finance, come from the US excellent textbooks often. And this particular textbook is a very good textbook. So when they talk about domestic economy, if you like, Or domestic currency or home currency, they are not talking about Australian domestic currency, but the textbook is talking about US currency. Home currency for the textbook you are using and for the PowerPoints we are using is US, and you need to appreciate that to start with. So let me just very carefully say that. The textbook also often uses the term home bracket domestic currency and foreign currency. Because the textbook is written from a US perspective, it usually treats the US dollar as domestic or home currency. OK. And non-US currencies are foreign currencies. The textbook often refers to home currency versus foreign currency. So when you read home currency, you talk about US dollars, not Australian dollars. I appreciate that. This means that the number of home currency units per one unit of foreign currency. That means the number of home currencies 1 units of if you like home currencies per one unit of foreign currency. In other words, foreign currency is base currency. Base currency has one unit against home currency or reference currency, which is x units of currency. It could be a bit more than one. It could be less than one of base currency. So for example, US versus euro, 1.2 means $1.2 buys €1. This means €1 is equal to $1.2. Very simple, but you just need to realize the way the value of each of these two currencies are reported. And given to you if you like, when you read it. Nothing will change between the two countries. No factual information changes. No transaction will be different. All we are saying is €1 if you like, in this case, if you like a euro as base currency is equivalent to $1.2. That's as simple as that. Now, As part of that, I just want to give you a footnote definition or definitions, American versus European currencies, if you like, or quotations. You do not need to know about it. We do not examine you. We do not refer to it. What you need to understand in global finance there is also a definition called American quotation of currency, American terms we call it, and European terms. What is American terms? American currency quotations defined as direct quote shows how many US dollars it takes to purchase one unit of foreign currency. So American terms of quotation is how many basically US dollars it takes to buy one unit of foreign currency. How do you show it? Look at previous slides here we define it exactly that home currency, foreign currency. We've got €1 at the bottom of this PowerPoint equivalent to $1.2. €1 versus 1.2. This is in effect indeed it is called American currency quotations. That's what we are using. OK. Then the other definition is called European currency quotations. European currency quotations defined as indirect quote shows how much foreign currency is needed to purchase one unit of US dollar. How many units of, for instance, Japanese yen do you need to buy $1. That's what it says. Let's just call it European terms. You would say, why is that the case? And that's why I don't want you to be at all worried about the European American definition. Once you've seen that. You are not going to twist it around, say anything about it, or change anything. Just you know that. X units of foreign currencies equivalent to $1. Why? The reason for that is when you are talking about an American textbook which deals with domestic or if you like, domestic currency. This is the American audience written by Americans for American Students First, but the role of the US is more than the US dollar in America. The US is a global power. The US dollar is the reserve currency, one of the major reserve currencies of the world. And many basically trading transactions in oil, minerals, food, agricultural products are priced in US dollars. And therefore people want to know how many units of their currency equivalent to $1 because they are trading so many commodities in the international market. And therefore, in addition to what I've just said to you about the way basically we look at x units of US dollar versus €1 1.2 US dollar equivalent to €1 in the previous slide, you also need to know for your information so that you have the whole basically big picture in your head. Sometimes people say $1 buys 1 units of other currencies. That setting has to do with international setting of US dollar as reserve currency as major. Bench for many trading commodities items which are transacted every day on a daily basis. So therefore, the next slide is trying to simply inform our students that you be aware of this factor as well as you finish this course and you get to the market. The first reason is why many publications, including textbooks, exchange rate quotes against the US dollar. Dominant Global dominance established by Bretton Woods Agreement in 1944, the US remains the preferred reserve currency. Therefore, central banks' financial hold vast amounts of their reserves in US dollars. Second reason, international trade. The vast majority of global cross-border trade, such as oil and commodities, is priced and settled in the US dollar. So 3rd, liquidity and stability. Because the US has the world's largest economy, the US dollar is highly liquid, allowing large transactions to take place as smoothly and with lower conversion costs. So that's the reality. You could just say in the future you might have one global currency. OK, that is the world reserve. At the present time we do not have one global currency. We have got a few major currencies which are basically kept as reserve currencies. The US dollar is one. The euro is another one, and then it drops from 65% in the US, €25 and then goes down to Japan, Swiss franc, pound, sterling, etc. So don't be surprised if sometimes you see $1 is 5.33 Mexico peso. One, did I say? I said American dollar is equivalent to 5.3 Mexican pesos. One American dollar is equivalent to 38 Zimbabwe currency in Southern Africa. One American dollar is equivalent to 100 Japanese yen. So don't be surprised. You have another PowerPoint slot next week, I think. They talk about Danish krone, Danish krone, Denmark currency. You look at one American dollar by say 6.5 or 5.7, Danish krone. That's OK. You understand the reason may be because there is a particular Context in which the US dollar is benchmark, and the three reasons given to you is on this page. So that's again as a footnote for you. OK, that's another footnote for you. And you're not going to be examined on any of this. All we're trying to do is to set the foundation of the way we communicate, exchange it between one currency to another. That's all we're trying to do, OK? So you'd be very relaxed about the slides that I've just covered. As long as you go through it. Learn them, master them, practice them in tutorial questions as we go along. That's all you need to do. OK. So I just want to make sure students are very clear the purpose of all these issues. Another issue that will be referred to again next week, I don't need to go into too much details, cross rates, and that is what is cross rates? The cross rate is the exchange rate between two currencies calculated using a third currency. It is used when two currencies aren't commonly traded directly against each other. In other words, if you're trading within, say, New Zealand dollar versus, let me just show you actually it's easier. Examples cross, for instance, euro currency versus Australian dollar. It's not the most because versus Eurozone versus the Australian dollar, Australia is a small economy. So the first thing you need to know the value of euro currency against the US dollar, value of Australian dollar against euro against US dollar, value of Australian dollar against the US dollar. Then you create exchanges between the euro and Australian dollar. New Zealand and Australia at the bottom, the same thing. You look at Australian currency versus the US, New Zealand currency against the US, then exchanges between Australia and the other one, Swiss franc and Japanese yen. You don't have always trading. It's a very small economy versus a large economy. Cross rate basically is calculated exchange between Swiss and Japanese yen. Again, this is a footnote until you go and expand on it in different settings from next week onwards. So that's just a footnote. Are you still awake? How was it so far, the chapter 2? Are you clear? It's very specific, yeah, very clear, basically. OK, um, do you want to have a few minutes break? Is that the practice usually or not? You want to have it. OK, we keep going. People say no, let's go. All right, so let's go for it. So it's a good place to pause, OK, and now let's just change the tone, if you like, and give you a definition again of the big picture in the context of the international monetary system. The International monetary system will be covered in week 5, where the system was set after the Second World War, where we're talking about the US dollar as a reserve currency. The US dollar became the major currency, and against those days gold was part of the exchange rate system. The US dollar became convertible to gold. And every other currency basically started benchmarking the price of US dollar versus gold and then using that for their own value of currency. That was a particular system which was referred to as a fixed exchange rate system. Basically, currency of say US dollar, pound, or sterling was fixed to each other based on a particular agreement arrangement noting that the US dollar is already anchored to the value of gold. Um This particular system in the 1970s has gradually changed, and most countries shifted from a fixed exchange rate that is set for maybe two months, three months, sometimes years between, say, American dollars and pound sterling to daily what we call a flexible exchange rate. I don't need to go into details now. We'll come back to that later on. Suffice to say. That some countries, they have what we call a floating rate or flexible exchange rate. Where like Australian dollar versus US, Australian American dollars versus the euro, every second exchange rate changes. OK, the other system is called PEG system or fixed exchange rate, which is set by government, central bank. Increase in park value, decrease in power, and then when you are having flexible exchange rate, when you have flexible exchange rate like Australian dollar, America, all these major currencies. If the value of that currency goes up, what's the notation? What's the terminology you use? You say that currency has appreciated. Look at this PowerPoint. Increasing market value of the currency has increased. If the currency, for instance, for instance, The currency goes down means the currency depreciated. That's the terminology we use. You see the problems in tutorial, in the PowerPoints, etc. Currency depreciates, appreciate. That's what we're used to. However, other countries, including, I just want to say China, has got fixed exchange rate because China is such an important country, and you need to note that. So in that case, the currency yuan could basically revalue or devalue. We don't say appreciate or depreciate. And I just want to say for instance here Hong Kong currency is the same. You've got fixed fixed rate against the US dollar, Hong Kong currency. Can I just clarify, there's nothing wrong whether it's exchanges should be fixed or flexible. There are different attributes, benefits, costs, etc. That is not a controversial issue in literature. I just want to remind the students that in Australia we had exchange rate fixed until 1983. When most countries have shifted in the 1970s to flexible, we were one of the last to shift to a flexible rate. British pound, the same thing basically. Gradually nations have moved from fixed to flexible exchange rate, so you need to be aware, and that's just a prelude to the fact that we're going to discuss one currency goes up or down, are precious and depreciate. You understand the context of that. OK, setting the equilibrium, the exchange rate is the price of one unit of foreign currency expressed as a set price in the US dollar home currency. I've already said to you, for instance, you can save $1.2 against €1. This means €1 is worth 1.2. So if you see a BMW in Germany which is priced $62.5,000 the current exchange rate is 1.2 against €1 if you like. How much does BMW cost in the US dollar? All you need to do is the price of the BMW in the euro multiplied by the value of the American dollar against the euro, which is 1.275. That's basically what it is. When Americans purchase German goods, foreign currency demand derives from demand for foreign countries' goods, services, and financial assets. Demand for German cars by American. In other words, when you're buying, if you like German cars, you are basically buying the euro in order to basically pay for the currency that you are paying basically you pay in US dollars because you're buying foreign commodities. And so here demand for a currency, demand for a currency is a function of demand for foreign goods denominated in that currency. For instance, US demand for Eurozone goods increases demand for euros to pay for those goods. You're buying more from Europe, you have to pay in euros. You need to convert your currency into euro currency. As demand for the euro increases, the value of the dollar falls against the euro. As you buy more of something, what happens if you have more demand for orange? The price of orange goes up. So as demand for the euro increases, treated as an orange, the value of the dollar falls against the euro. In other words, the value of the euro goes up against the US dollar because the more people want, the currency appreciates. The value of the dollar falls against the euro. Americans demand fewer eurozone goods, services, and assets. Basically that's the crux of the matter. As the euro goes up, then German cars become too expensive and Americans will pull back. So they are some of the process of equilibrium change. Price of exchanges from one level to another. Supply of a currency, supply of the euro is a function of Eurozone demand for US goods. Euro zone consumers must buy dollars to buy US goods. As the value of the euro increases against the dollar. Increased eurozone demands for US goods increases demand for dollars, which increases the amount of euro supplied. And again, this process, you want more euros basically in order to purchase foreign goods. This process continues on. And what's the upshot of all this supply and demand for each other's goods where you have to supply the currency of the other country as part of the process, you end up. Supply and demand as if you're talking about orange price of orange, supplier and demander, consumers, you end up with an exchange rate of north between quantity of, for instance, euro currency versus US dollars supply and demand. This is the starting point of the exchange rate. I mean we're making it up, of course. It's ongoing every minute, but for the sake of presentation, let's assume it's set for instance now so. In this case we say that this e north is the current exchange rate, the spot exchange rate if you like. E11 euro buys x units of US dollars, and the quantity is basically what you see there. Then the question here is, if that's the case, what are the forces which can influence, if you like, the price changes and in effect the value of the currencies between the euro and US dollar could change. They are not constant. They are just changing all the time. But where are the times when there is a major change, if you like, you see currencies appreciate or depreciate. One is called supply and demand. Inflation factors is one, interest rate factor, economic growth factors, political and economic risk factors, and so on. And so I just want you to only get some gist of some of the forces that could influence the fluctuation of the exchange rate, and I focus on basically one of them, and that is the inflation differential. So here are main factors affecting exchange rate inflation, economic growth, central bank independence, interest rate differential, political. Economic risks. So this is the global economy. It's the ocean. You are swimming. There is uncertainty, new information, new economic data appears. Central banks decide about higher interest rates, lower interest rates. All of them will influence bad inflation news. All of them will affect basically the value of currency, say, US dollar versus euro in this case. Consequence of higher inflation in the US compared to the Eurozone. The European buyers, for instance, if inflation in the US is higher than that in the Eurozone, European buyers purchase fewer US products due to high US inflation, too expensive to buy American goods. This means that high US inflation leads to a decrease in the supply of euros. As fewer goods are purchased from the US, the supply curve to the euro shifts to the left. I'll show you in a second. You don't need to worry about supply demand curve shift. None of them is examinable. I want you to understand the concept. At the same time, higher prices in the US will lead American consumers to substitute Eurozone imports for US products, resulting in a shift of the euro demand curve to the right. This leads to a new exchange rate. Where the US dollar depreciates against the euro or the euro appreciates against the US, that's the issue that we were talking about the US dollar. When prices are high, please note that in America consumers face a high cost of living. To stretch their budget, they naturally trade down from premium imported euro zone goods. For instance, I don't want to import BMW because BMW €62.5 is now costing me $85,000 US dollars. Which often include high shipping tariffs, currency conversion, to more affordable domestic alternatives. So I'd better buy an American made car. So that's basically the impact of US inflation on the equilibrium exchange rate. Supply for the euro shift to the left. Europeans pulled back buying American goods and Americans also start shifting basically as a result of their inflation, buying basically more domestic goods. Demand also shifts to the right, so we end up with a new equilibrium as you can see. Here this gray color with a new exchange rate between euro and US dollar from the north we move to E1. What does that mean? In effect it means euro against US dollar has appreciated. Alternatively, The US dollar has depreciated. That's just mechanism. No, you don't need to memorize this graph. There's no exam on graphs. You just need to understand the mechanical part of that. That's all I'm saying. And similarly, I have expanded on that concept again another page or 1.5 pages. You can read it yourself. I already explained it, but I don't need to read that. That's the exact gist of the impact of inflation. Higher inflation in one country to another, will lead to the new setting of exchange rate due to inflation. That's all. And in Chapter 4, we will be. Institutionalizing through different basically foundation work including purchasing power parity how this mechanism operates if you like so that you know that we come back to these issues. The second factor which could influence if you like the exchange rate value is changing interest rate between two countries, but the first thing you need to note is when we talk about, for instance, US interest rate is higher than US Euro zone interest rate. Therefore, more Europeans are going to invest in American assets. Which interest rate you talking about? Are we talking about nominal interest rate or real interest rate? Have you done nominal and real exchange rate in other courses? Yes or no, you did. Some of you say yes. OK, so basically this is just a notation again. We come back to all that in the future weeks. A real interest rate is a stated interest rate with the rate of inflation removed from it. It reflects the real cost of funds to a borrower and real yield to a lender or an investor. In other words, if inflation in America, the interest rate in America is 6%. But inflation is 2%, so the real interest rate in America for an investor's perspective in Europe has to be 4%. Take out the inflation, or sometimes expected inflation if you like, of this interest rate. In Europe, if for instance the interest rate is, as an example again, 3 and inflation is basically 2. So in that case you have got only 1% real interest rate in Europe versus 4% in America. America was 6 minus 2% inflation, so it's 4%. In Europe it was 3 if you like interest rate minus if you like 2% inflation. It's 1%. So would you as a European go and invest more in US assets? The answer is yes, 4% real interest rate versus 1% real interest rate in Europe. I'd better just go and change my currency. Change means buy basically foreign assets in US dollars. So the real interest rate is nominal interest rate minus rate of inflation or expected or actual. Assuming that we are talking about real interest rate differentiation between two countries, so what will happen if there is a rise in interest rates in America compared to Europe? So the consequence of that is Europeans will rush to invest in securities and other assets in America. So as you demand more orange, what will happen to the price of orange? Price of orange goes up. And so as more people buy US dollar, what will happen to the value of the US dollar against the eurozone? The US dollar will go up in that. Everyone wants orange. They don't want apple. Apple says assume is the real interest rate in Europe. They gave up apple. Everyone wants to demand orange, so the exchange rate US dollar will appreciate against euro over time as people are shifting their assets from. Basically Europe to US and of course remember there are processes involved because when people want to invest in the US they have to hedge themselves, buy back the euro when the situation gets. The US, the euro interest rate goes up and so there are processes involved that we are going to talk about it from next week onwards. I don't want to get into detail, otherwise I can't finish the lecture. So you get the concept of the exchange rate. That's the focus. And again, please read these passages as you wish. The same thing economic growth. If there is stronger economic growth in the US as opposed to euro, again, there is more demand for US dollar. There are again reasons for that. One of them is more economic activities, higher rate of return of investment, etc. etc. So they are the forces which influence the value of, say, US dollar currency. Against the euro, that's all you needed to know. There are facts and basically forces, indeed more factors and forces which are influencing the exchanges between the euro versus the US. That's all I want you to appreciate and understand. Political risk is another risk. I don't need to go through that. If you know there is a problem in the Middle East, you have to run away from it. There are so many factors. Each of them will influence basically the exchange rate. That's another one. Uh, OK. I've just noted here in red, all I want to say is I encourage the students to simply look at the PowerPoints of this chapter without reading the textbook of this section or any other things because we want to ensure the notation we are using remains consistent throughout the course and tutorial questions also reflects the same thing. So just follow basically the PowerPoints here. That's all we're saying. And remember what I've just said to you already in slide number 6. Textbook users convention reference is a currency is A and B is base currency. It means, uh, basically, it means that one unit of B in this, for instance, buys x units of A. That's the notation we use. 1 unit of B buys x units of A. And recall, the textbook often calls home currency versus foreign currency again because it's a textbook which is American. In this case, home domestic currency is reference currency. In other words, the US dollar is reference currency and foreign currency is base currency. In other words, foreign currency is euro, 1 unit of euro equivalent to. X number of reference currencies. What was the figure we had before? 1. US dollars is equivalent to €1. That's all you need to understand. That's all. The change in the value of base currency basically, which in this case a previous example was the euro is equal to the spot rate of basically old exchange rate, the new exchange rate. Remember the graph you saw where you move from 0 to E1. The new exchange rate due to say higher inflation in America. You remember that the graphe north, just go back again to make sure you are with me here you move from E north to E1, so we're capturing basically the change in exchange rate due to some economic forces. So E1 is new exchange rate. If E1 The new exchange rate is bigger than the initial exchange rate. The base currency appreciates. An example we had was the euro has appreciated. If E1 is less than E0 base currency depreciates. Simple. That's all I want, you know, is just to simply master these concepts. The same issue applies in a reciprocal way for the basically reference currency which is the US dollar. So what if the euro currency goes up, appreciates the other currency, the US dollar goes down, they appreciate. So the change in the value of reference currency is e north minus E1 divided by E1. Old, old exchange, new exchange. So E1 is bigger than e north. For US currency, the reference currency depreciates. E1 is less than e north, the reference currency appreciates. Now, let's look at a couple of examples in this process. And with a few examples, everything becomes so simple and you say, oh yeah, it's just so easy. I can see now. OK, so for instance, depending on the current value of the euro relative to the dollar, the amount of euro appreciation or the depreciation that could be for instance due to high inflation in the case of the US versus inflation, as was shown before is computed as a fractional increase or decrease in the dollar value of the euro. How do we see that the change in exchange rate between US dollar and euro? So we have got different figures. For example, if US versus euro exchange rate goes from €1 remember. Based currency €1 against x units of US dollars, so it's 0.93 moves from that to €1.091. So there is a shift in value of the euro. €1 can suddenly buy more US dollars from 0.93 buys more, 1.09. So the euro has appreciated, in effect, the US dollar depreciated. The euro is said to have appreciated by the change in its dollar value, which is basically new value, 1.09 of the US dollar minus initial value of the US dollar against €1 0.93 divided by 0.93. Which means 17.2% basically appreciation of the euro. How do you see it in a visual way, amount of euro appreciation, new dollar value of the euro, old dollar value of euro, old dollar value of euro, and that's exactly what in this case we've done. Are you clear? Simple. And now as we go along, it becomes even simpler because then it becomes routine because we've got a few examples. So the base currency, which is the euro by definition. Using equation 10 minus e north, substituting a number from the previous examples basically gave us €17.2 appreciation. In other words, we used basically this, we use the initial value, new value, and basically we plugged it into this equation called equation one. It gives us 17.2% appreciation. And now if the euro has appreciated, what about US dollar depreciation? Alternatively, we can calculate the change in euro value of the dollar. We can do this by recognizing that if the exchange rate equals the dollar value of a euro. A dollar value of a €1 dollars per euro for euro currency, then the euro value of €8 per dollar must be the reciprocal. In other words, 1/1. So what we do is, for example, if the euro worth used to be remembered 0.93, then the dollar must be worth 1 divide by 0.93. That's basically reciprocal of the value of €1 against x units of US dollars. The change in the euro value of the dollar between 0 and 1 equals 21 divided by e1 minus 1 divided by e. Previous initial exchange rate, new exchange rate. In percentage terms, the dollar is said to have depreciated against the euro by a fractional decrease in the euro value, so this is called equation 2. You can see the reciprocal of, if you like, equation 1 is written here. And so therefore equation 1 is this one. Have a look again. I just want to make sure you get it. Equation 1 e1 in north E1. You're talking about euro here. Here we are talking about reciprocal of euro and therefore it becomes e north minus e1. Divide by e1, whereas the previous one is e1, which is the new exchange rate minus the initial exchange rate. Whereas in this case, initial exchange rate minus new exchange rate $4 so reference currency in this case basically has depreciated by how much you plug the numbers, you get -14.68% depreciation. So once you know equation 1 and equation 2, you will see similar things basically in as well. And now don't worry about the notes here at the bottom. You can read it, not examinable, just a footnote. It's not a big issue. It's not examinable just for your information. Now let's consolidate our learning. So how do we do that very quickly. The same thing. Equation 1 is repeated here. Let's take another example. In 2022, the yen dropped against the dollar dollar against the Japanese yen from 0.0086, big number, to 0.00764. OK, so by how much did the Japanese yen depreciate? So one Japanese yen was buying 0086, now it's buying 0076. So it's buying less. So if the Japanese yen buying less. Of US dollars means US dollar appreciated, but the Japanese yen has depreciated. OK. Once you get it, so here apply the equation basically 1 up there, here you apply it by how much the currency depreciated 11 minus 11.97. And you do the same thing for equation 2 about how much the US dollar has appreciated. So what you do is basically equation 2 comes in. You use the reciprocal here. You use the equation 2 of these two currencies. So if the yen. Against the dollar moved from this value to the next one, by how much did the American dollar appreciate? So you put the figures in a reciprocal form, if you like, for changing the value of the Japanese yen in equation 2, you get 13.579. Very simple. I'll give you another example, the same principle, so that you get it. In other words, not magic, sort of too complicated, it's very straightforward. You use again equation 1 against British pound against dollar. So US versus pound moved from $1.48 was going 1 pound moved to $1.36 US dollars. So what does that mean? That means in this case the pound is buying less units of American dollars, from 1.48 to 1.36. So by how much did the pound depreciate, you again put the figures of new figure, new exchange rate 1.36 minus the initial exchange rate here into equation 1, which is up there by how much? -8. And again you do the same calculation for the value of the US dollar which has appreciated. You do the same thing by using equation 2. You get 868. Is it difficult? Now it's easy. You get what I'm saying. Once you go back, once you follow, once you master it, you've got the great foundation for this course. That's the whole idea of this week. OK, the same thing. Another one. I'm getting tired. Should I go through it? Another one is, what about euro versus US dollar? Exactly the same thing. The dollar rose against the euro from 1.2 to basically euro to 0.98.2. So in this case, the euro depreciates against the US dollar. Apply equation one, you get -18%. The depreciation of the euro. What's the appreciation of euro? Use the equation to 22%. OK, time to move on. The next one, I don't go through it, it's again the same thing. So Are you still awake? Thank you for your patience. I have to say I'm very pleased that we went through all this process. We and the team, I had great support from particularly one of our very best tutors to make sure that genuinely we want to make sure that you are on the right set and path. And you start with a great foundation with enthusiasm. You go and learn the foreign exchange market. You look at the bigger picture of PowerPoint of Chapter One. And then build the foundation with true tutorial, and as we go along, you note that the course gets a little bit heavy in week 2 and 3 possibly. Because you have to go through, but once you get these foundations, you get them through, and then you start enjoying it from week 5 onwards. So you need just to allow this new information analysis, relationship between exchange rate, inflation, interest rate, forward rate, spot rate, etc. to basically sink in, practice them, then you will genuinely, I know that you will enjoy this course very much. OK. So different tune, if you like. It's not as I'm not using as much energy as I used up until now. But still fundamentally very important. This is about the independence of central banks. In other words, if a central bank is run by the government of the day, we used to have it in Australia, the Prime Minister calls the Governor General, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, would say, I want to have an election in 12 months' time. Can you reduce the interest rate? And I don't care about the inflationary impact of that. I just want to make sure I create jobs, I make the economy activities going up so that I can be re-elected. And of course I give you the example in Australia. I know in Australia the Prime Minister doesn't do that, but I just gave you the example so that you know in many countries, in developing countries, it's not unusual for such cozy relationship. However, in Australia also. By basically default, if you like, we always had a reserve bank, the same thing as we had an exchange rate which was fixed and then we moved to flexible exchange rate and in other countries as well, by the way, not only Australia. England and other countries. So we gradually learned to make reserve bank or central bank independent from the government of the day. Why? Because there is no temptation not to combat against inflation, because there is going to be an election coming up, for instance. So the objectives of central banks are full employment. Very low inflation, 2 to 3%. And once the central banks have credibility and the people, the financial market recognizes this, they respect the value of that currency, which is the Australian dollar, for instance, pound sterling, euro. They become like as good as gold. Because people trust that the value of this currency doesn't drop due to political interference where I lose 10% of the value of my pound that I'm investing in Switzerland. And that is why with the exception of the last couple of years that the gold became so popular for central banks due to new geopolitics around the world, the central banks used to hold only foreign currencies US dollar, pound sterling, Australian dollar, Canadian dollar, etc. They didn't need gold, but the world has changed. Everyone now is ordering gold basically just in case, because we can't rely on the current world order if you like. So that's if you like, it's either an anomaly or it's a new chapter, but I want to say to you that generally speaking, people respect currencies where the central bank and indeed their own government also applies absolute transparency and integrity. And that's very important. We've seen it over the years. Currencies are sold on the market rapidly because people lost their confidence in government or central banks. Significant depreciation, high inflation, high unemployment. That's the crux of the issue of central banks and the currency where The interest rates set by the by the central bank influences the value of the currency of that country. We've just finished about forces which could influence the exchange rate. One of them was inflation. Inflation will be direct byproduct of basically unnatural force of creating lower interest rates by central banks which could be corrupt. Lower interest rates where it's not warranted will lead to inflation. Inflation will lead to depreciation of the currency, and many consequences associated with that. I don't have time to go into that. You will be reading. You will be studying Chapter 4. That's the crux of the matter. So now I can just very quickly read some of this quickly. A bank uses instruments of monetary policy to achieve three primaries price stability, low interest rates, target currency, and as I said, many of the central banks have got an employment mandate as well. Make sure. You watch that one. Central banks actually influence all of the factors that impact currency value because expectations of central bank behavior are important. Reputation is important. If central banks create too much money, inflation will occur and currency value will fall. Thus, currency central bank anyway, I don't need to go through. I've already said all that. I just want to give you an example. In 1920, Germany resorted to inflation to fund First World War repatriations to the Allies. And so in 1923, it took 4 bank notes to buy a loaf of bread. In other words, people had to take in their luggage, even currencies, to do shopping. Because you can devalue the currency so much because of the way you run the bank, central bank, that the credibility of the currency has gone and the economy, and that's what German, by the way, German inflation, the Bundesbank is the best bank virtually in the world and now of course they have got the European Central Bank managing the interest rate there. But they've learned from after the First World War this is terrible. We don't want inflation in the country, not 5%, not 4%, 2%. That's it, basically, ideally. So here it says central bank independence. In other words, if you look at inflation in 1970 to 199292 and central bank independence on the horizontal axis, this is the blue line. What it means is certain countries like Germany, Switzerland, when they had the lowest inflation, The central bank independence if you like, is very high. Austria, Netherlands, United States, Denmark, Australia is here simply because we switched to independent central bank about 1520 years ago. It wasn't the data is from 1970. Those days we didn't have independent. United Kingdom for the same reason, New Zealand for the same reason, etc. and then you see other countries like Indonesia, South Africa, Portugal, Greece, India, etc. etc. because that reputation is not as strong as other central banks, basically. Uh OK, I better just go through fundamentals of central bank. Now what do central banks do basically in general? So what they do, real exchange rates and relative competitiveness, foreign exchange rate market intervention. All I want to say is that The real exchange rate, by the way, General said the real exchange rate, the real exchange rate is the exchange rate which is corrected for inflation differentiated between two countries. In other words, if you don't correct the exchange rate for inflation differential, then basically the exchange rate is a nominal exchange rate. And you will discuss these materials in the next two weeks home currency appreciation or depreciation or mixed blessing. Home currency. Imagine I want to take you through a few steps only for you to know the role of central banks if they for various economic good reasons, the exchange rate of a currency goes up or down. If home currency appreciation like US dollars, what will happen to the economic forces? Dollar prices of imports fall. Suddenly European goods become cheaper, so that you get the link between the role of central banks and at the end of the day, the exchange rate, the real exchange rate value and its consequences. Dollar price of imports for benefiting US consumers. Everyone wants German cars. Dollar prices of exports are higher, benefiting US firms with products with low substitution. In other words, if you are Boeing and you can export Boeing, there is no substitution for Boeing, maybe Airbus, but then you benefit. Otherwise not necessarily because people shift their preferences from American goods to other goods. Lower import prices put downward pressure on prices of competing US products, reducing domestic inflation. So this is another factor. Cost of foreign investment is lower for US firms. If your dollar has gone up by 10%, you can buy real estate in Japan 10% cheaper because your dollar has gone up by 10% more. What's the disadvantage of, if you like? Currency US exports become less competitive. People start switching from American goods to foreign goods. In foreign markets, domestic competition from lower priced foreign imports increases. Domestic reform lower priced foreign imports will increase. US losses jobs in US traded goods because people are switching from US commodities to other goods. Higher cost of operating in the US reduces foreign direct investment. If the dollar is too high, Japanese and Europeans don't want to come and invest in a particular company in the US because they have to pay 10% more because the US dollar has gone up by 10%. So they are the disadvantage. And of course this is appreciation. The same thing applies in the context of depreciation. I'm not, I'm just conscious of time. Home currency depreciation, you will see some of the consequences. US exports become more competitive, but dollar prices of imports are higher, hurting US consumers. When the US dollar goes down, foreign goods become too expensive. We in Australia, it's the same. Australian dollar goes down, we have to pay more for foreign goods. And the story goes on and on. Basically, the last thing I want to say here is a very powerful graph, beautiful graph I want to show you, and that is from 1974 to 19922. It shows the actual real exchange rates of real broad dollars index against over a period of time where US dollar, the value of the US dollar has gone basically down, up, down, up, down, and due to various forces of monetary policy, central bank's policy, global crisis, geopolitics, the US dollar moves from the index, which is 1,973,100. Basically, you can see it gone to very high, then very low in the 90s by intervention of central bank and then gone up to 2002 due again to some economic positive forces, then gradually down until the global financial crisis 2011 and then gradually again back again during COVID came down a bit, but then Where we have here, this 30 years of experience with the exchange rate is a reflection of the way government and central banks basically and economic forces around the world can make or break fortunes of people as the exchange rates keep changing. Having said that, I would like just to simply finish this lecture by, uh, bear with me for a second, just make sure that I have fulfilled my obligation here. And that is this is basically the business school pass. You know that, yes, you attend, but James being very kind. Do I need to explain all these details or you know? You know that. So, OK, what is pass? I know you know it. Here is the gentleman, James, who is basically going to assist you. And he did his discourse in 2025. He will facilitate this group, pass in flexible, cater to students, social, informal, extensive. Why attend, deepen your understanding of course content, develop the skills for independent study, improve your grades. I didn't know he improves your grades. I better make the exam harder then. I'm just joking. So it's a very good incentive. Make social connections and form friendship, build communication and teamwork skills. Feedback from T 126. He's excellent. I'm not going to read all of that. He's fantastic, and that's why he continues this work for us. We are very proud of him. Sessions next Tuesday. Monday is a public holiday next week. And there is no lecture here. There is no need for alternative because the same lecture will be repeated on Tuesday and is online. Frankly, we can't just suddenly go and find a new hall somewhere in the middle of campus, so there wouldn't be any replacement of lecture on Monday, but there will be a lecture by Dr. David Caldwell on Tuesday. About that, but otherwise you just watch it online. So here is Tuesday, 11 to 10 to 11 low 101 Monday 2 to 3 bus, business school 105 and it's already on. Thank you for your patience. I'm so pleased that you've been very patient and we went through those fundamentals. Thank you. I'd better go quickly because the lectures are here.

SPEAKER 1
It's Are you Alexis?

SPEAKER 0
Sorry, I was, I was a bit late, yeah. Sorry about that. Thank you so much. Go, go set up yourself.

SPEAKER 1
What are you teaching? Beautiful. OK.

SPEAKER 0
I will be, I will finish earlier next time, sorry about that. That's OK. So, how you define, guys? Alright. I think the problem with the class these days is the students have got their own devices and do whatever they have to do.

SPEAKER 1
That's OK, I don't mind.

SPEAKER 0
I do the same thing. OK, bye.

SPEAKER 1
Oh. Sorry.
