SPEAKER 0
OK, Welcome to International Business Finance. I just want to say that I always say to students who take this course. That it is a very useful course in general. It's very, you, you get a lot out of this course and generally speaking, genuinely I'm so happy when students, I know we have many students, hundreds, but when you undertake this course. The reason for that is because. It basically assumes you have already done some basic finance and then basically broaden the scope of finance to global finance. And so you suddenly realise that OK, the training in this course is assisting me to understand the function of multinational companies because the whole, if you look at the global economy these days, multinational companies, there are basically thousands of them if you like. These companies are very influential, as I will be showing you shortly. And of course as a result of that, what this course is teaching you is to say that in the first part of the course, here are some techniques about exchange rate and risk associated with exchanges between countries, so US versus Eurozone as an example. US currency versus the Japanese yen. And so in this context, you learn in the 1st 4 weeks a lot of technical issues. This lecture is the foundation lecture. I'm very happy to see all of you here, and those, those of you who are not here, I hope they will be basically watching the first lecture and I might just actually write to everyone, not that because I'm lecturing it, but because it's such a foundation sort of content where it gives you the foundation of the rest of the course. And so we basically look at the relationship between exchange rate after this week. And different economic factors, for instance, inflation, exchange rate, forward rate, spot rate. And various forces influencing if you like, the competitiveness of one country in the context of the price of, say, Japanese yen versus US dollar, and we know that the change in exchange rate will affect the value of your exports as a country, the cost of your import as a country. And at the same time will alert the investors whether they should invest if your exchange rate, for instance, is up by 10%. Well, should I go to Australia when 10%, I have to pay 10% more for what I'm going to acquire. And what about when the exchange rate is down by 5%? Would that provide an opportunity for me now to go to Australia? This is just an example, to give you the importance of exchange rate and the exchange risk. Exchange exchange rate risk where sometimes suddenly you see that US dollar dropped in value substantially. You can see sometimes it happens, you know, US dollar is very strong, but when it happens you can see the chaos in the stock market and generally financial market. And so once you learn this foundation, and I want to say also the 1st 4 weeks are the most important weeks in the, not what we cover, but the way you need to prepare yourself to learn the techniques that you need to know, and I highly recommend you to attend the tutorial if you can. I know we don't give you marks. I mean, I gave last year 10% participation, but nevertheless, You try to attend. Try at least to go through the solutions which are uploaded. Make sure you know them. Don't come after the midterm exam and say, sorry, you didn't cover this. I didn't know that. No, we are very systematic. We want you to go to tutorial if you can. There's no obligation because no one is going to check you whether you attended or not, but nevertheless, I think if you can, please try to attend. And if you can't sometimes check, make sure you know the solutions and the problems given to you. Anyway, from week 5 onwards, what we do generally speaking, we say this lecture, first lecture, you will see it. Here are multinational companies which have expanded their business in 110 countries or whatever, HSBC in 130+ countries. Now let's look at how to manage financial affairs of companies where they are exposed to different countries, different exchange rates, different financial risks, different regulations at national level, different political risks. How do you navigate when you're swimming in the ocean? That's the crux of the matter. And if you look at the title of your textbook, Multinational Financial Management, I like it. Multinational financial management, in other words, you learn. Techniques in the first part of the course where you will apply them as much as we have time for it. We go week by week. So that you learn, for instance, when it comes to raising capital as multinationals, where to go when there is a change in exchange rate. Say if Toyota is operating in India as an example and exchange rate in India has changed, rupee dropped in value, what should be the strategy of Toyota now? Should they produce more? Should they export more from India because the currency is competitive for them? We call it economic exposure, transaction exposure, when you've got 100 plus countries transactions happening every minute or every day at least. What's the effect of 5% decline in certain major currencies on your cash flow? You can see, ah yes, Japanese went down, pound sterling gone down, Japanese yen gone down, etc. or US suddenly gone up. I didn't hedge myself against that. So it's a massive operation, of course, but we simplify that for a lecture purpose, for training and teaching, what is called transaction exposure. Then you have got we get into cost of capital. You've already done cost of capital in different courses. We made basic courses you have done in finance, but we say what is international cost of capital of a multinational company which is raising capital? Are there different, different risks, different return, etc. etc. And then we get to cost after cost of capital we get to capital budgeting, which is again international capital budgeting where you go and get subsidies from Brazilian government. You say if I invest there, would you give me a discount on wages, wage subsidies? Would you give me a discount on depreciation, da da da da? You bargain with the host country. And the final lecture, if you like, the last part of the course, it says exactly that management of financial multinational companies. We look at how you minimise global tax, how you transfer certain bills from one subsidiary in Indonesia to Malaysia, from Malaysia to Australia to minimise tax. And different techniques that are used by multinational companies because they are a global network, that's really the crux of the discourse. So, uh, better just go now very quickly to a couple of issues. Um, I don't need to get through some of the, uh, I, I'm going through all of the globalisation and business, um, what is an MNC, multinational products, MNCs by country, American MNCs, etc. Um So first of all, it says the global marketplace is not for amateurs. In other words, there is always a risk when you become a multinational company. The example given to us is, for instance, you remember Nokia, once the world leader in cell phones, was displaced by Apple and Samsung in just a few years. In other words, you can be suddenly Superstar in the global market as a multinational company, but if you don't do 3616 and you haven't done your management financial management strategies and resilience of your finance, you can just fall apart. So that's of course finance is not the only thing, but it's a very important part of the strategy of multinational companies. Anyway, and so you can see for instance this is just you can see headquarters in France of some large US companies on here. I don't need to read that. You can have a look on this. Then headquartered in Germany with a large US presence and everywhere in Australia we've got headquarters of some multinational companies. These brands are we've been born and raised, most of you, not me, with these sort of brands if you like. And of course the next dimension of globalisation if you like is supply chains they call it in a different context. You can have Barbie, which is designed in California, but parts and clothing comes from different countries, as you can read now Hong Kong, China. Assembly Mexico, customers from North America, Europe, Asia, etc. In other words, that is the picture of globalisation of production and consumption, whether we like it or not. And similarly, iPhone, I had a better picture of that some years ago. So design in California, parts and supplies in many countries, again I'm not reading them, assembly China and India used to be mainly China initially. Customs 130 countries. That gives you an idea of the concept. The same thing. Hollywood relies on a global market. You've got people who are making a movie, but look at the nationalities from British, Dutch. Australia, United Kingdom, etc. etc. etc. Different nationalities and the nation, you look at university professors and lecturers, you can see us from all over the world. It's just the reality. And if you look at the personnel of multinational companies themselves, they come from all over the world. So that's the reality of an interconnected global economy. This picture is very powerful. Because it shows basically interconnectedness of companies around the world where we know Boeing is made in the US, but different parts are supplied in from different countries, from Italy, Australia, Japan, Korea, etc. Canada, UK, the story goes on, and that's also very telling, if you like, very powerful. Very briefly, um, just want to say, uh, this is not examinable and I've been late, so I will make it a condensed big picture for you if you don't mind. Multinationals. Emerged during the empires of the 16th century. British, as you can see one here, British East India Company, Dutch East India Company, and Hudson Bay also is from England. So they were basically gone to Asia, East India, British East India, spice from India, tea, you know, that was the beginning, and then they became virtually de facto government in many different parts of Asia, including India. They created a lot of challenges, opportunities and challenges. Dutch East India went to South Africa, part of Asia, in particular in Indonesia, where they have got a very close affiliation with the Netherlands. Still they have it, and Hudson's Bay went to Canada and some other parts of the world. That was not what we call multinational or what we have. What we have is, if you look at history, 1868, 1870, the beginning of modern multinational companies, MNCs, and that's the starting point of seeing suddenly one company becomes a number of companies in different parts of the world. And of course what is an MNC? You look at MNC home country, foreign subsidiary 12345. In other words, you can have various subsidiaries who are independent from, for instance, from Toyota in Japan. But each of them have got their own operation, yet they're all connected to the headquarters of Toyota in Tokyo. So that's really what it captures the essence of basically the difference between a national company as opposed to a global company is the. What differentiates them from other firms engaged in international business is globally coordinated allocation of resources by single centralised management. Yet the management is highly diversified. If I'm the manager of Toyota in I don't know, India or Wherever in Brazil, I'm not checking left and right what my manager in, for instance, Tokyo would say, but it is nevertheless there is a hierarchy. Nevertheless there is a hierarchy, otherwise they can't be efficient if you can't sort of allow flexibility and innovation at your own subsidiaries, you're just going to staff up the company. And this is another one MNC by country, different continents. There is no, you can't find many in Africa, which is in many ways sad if you like. Part of South America. They are where consumers are wealthy. They can buy and they can tap into markets where they can sell good products. OK, this is Fortune Global 500 companies by top 10 countries. You can look at the list. It's not surprising the names of countries where their multinational comes from, but this is 2022. I'll provide you an updated information shortly. And one of the things, you know, this is what I mean by MNCs, American MNCs comprises less than 1% of US firms but still accounts for 23%. of total private industry employment, 21% of GDP, more than 50% of exports, 70% of research and development spending. So in other words, that gives you an idea of what all graduates in America and everywhere else, they want to work for a multinational company because they know they're getting to a global setting, if you like, and of course a much higher standard of operation. So that's really the crux of the matter. And in terms of the latest top MNCs by market capitalization, I have just simply Googled AI that for you, so I haven't done much, and this is basically what I found top 1020 largest MMCs by market capitalization. You can see Alphabet, Apple, Go. On the list, not surprisingly, AI, in other words, IT companies, they are now absolutely from market capitalization. 5 years ago they didn't have such market capitalization. But the next IS, Saudi Aramco, which is petroleum, and that is very, very well, I mean that's very wealthy and Strong. And then you've got others who are not affected by AI. You can read them from top 11 to 20, as you can see some of them are well familiar to you. One thing you note ExxonMobil. In other words, oil producing companies are still there. They used to be usually amongst the very top. That is the older version of American companies. I already updated you with the previous one. Why MNCs are internationalisation, why corporations internationalise, measuring internationalisation, how firms become MNCs and MNC risk exposure. How firms become MNCs we need to pay attention to that. The first thing is why corporations internationalise, because first of all, not all MNCs are exactly the same. Some multinational companies are in oil, raw materials, iron ore, gold, so this is called raw materials companies. Oil, minerals. Find a new market is another category. I am Apple as an example. I've found different countries and I'm exploring to go to other countries as well. But of course many, if you like, companies, they do it because they have got examples here is Coca-Cola, McDonald's, where there is not so much intellectual property if you like, and not Apple to give away all your technology to foreign workers. But by foreign I mean you go to a national in another country, then you have to protect yourself all the time. But then they have learned that they can reach to consumers, billions of people virtually around the world, and then reduce costs is another example. Exploit lower overhead taxes, labour, environmental costs, etc. and that is. Not unusual. Many multinational companies, they go where they don't have to pay minimum wages. Environmental regulations are not as strong, so that is another incentive for them. However, multinational banks like JPMorgan, Citigroup, etc. They became multinational. We don't often talk about multinational banks. They are very, very powerful. Goldman Sachs, you know, all these investment banks, but they became multinationals because they followed their own customers like General Motors, which went to Europe. So the American banks decided to go to Europe. If Chevron decides to go to Japan, they go and set up branches there. If many companies went to China. American and European banks, they rush to China. So that's really the other nature of that. I think this just don't worry about this. This is just a follow up and no significance measuring internationalisation, why MNCs have expanded since the 1970s and 1980s. So one of the things you need to know is multinational companies means foreign direct investment. Let me just show you visually. You see foreign direct investment FDI is a measure of growing internationalisation. In other words, when you have Toyota. They can't ship everything. They will take the money. They might take some equipment. They go to Brazil to build up their factory. They go to Europe to build their factory. So that's foreign and foreign direct investment. If you Google it, I haven't checked very recently, the size of foreign direct investment is very high, as high as the actual global trade. OK, I could be wrong in terms of accuracy, but I want to tell you definitely I'm sure that foreign direct investment, I look at over a period of time, has substantially increased, and instead of Toyotas exporting everything from Tokyo or Japan to the rest of the world, they go directly to consumers in China, Europe, Latin America, etc. It's not something, it's a common sense if you like. And so one of the things we noted annual US foreign direct investment inflows and outflows, for instance, you see from 1980 to 2020, has gone up and down. But one thing which led to so-called multinationalization, if I call it, we call it MNCs, multinational companies, was deregulation in many countries, including India, China after the 1980s. They have opened up their countries basically to foreign companies and that is where foreign direct investment became massive. And so one of the things I want to show you this graph stock of worldwide FDI stock. In other words, the previous one said it's a flow, annual US foreign direct investment inflow outflow. It is a cash flow for that year, every year, how much you send overseas. But when you accumulate, you add up all the inflow and outflow over 40 years, say 1980s to 2020 or up to now, this is what you get something like that. You get a stock of worldwide FDI, and what you have here it says US FDI, US FDI, $6.6 trillion in 2022. FDI, we can't find the very latest. You can't find 2026. It's always a two year lag, generally speaking, while the stock of US FDI inflow on a comparable basis exceeded 5.2 trillion. In other words, And worldwide FDI stock is 44.25 trillion in 2000. In other words, when you look at the US and Europe, they have FDI going up, particularly US, but a lot of companies are coming in as well. So you need to understand the two-way flow of this process. Um The other dimension of what I already alluded to is that many companies from US, Europe, Japan decide to go to developing countries we call it. But in reality, which countries were the main countries the recipient of foreign capital? China and India, because they have population, they've got growing consumers in terms of wealth. Multnationals, this is the place where I can sell my car. This is where I can sell my electronic goods. This is where I can open my banks, basically. How firms become MNCs. This is a visual presentation. Let me just give you a quick what it means is Toyota, for instance, export to Australia or America or whatever from Japan. Then they gradually say, maybe visually I explain it it's much better. Just have a look here. You were initially exporting, I think it's better for you to see the sequence exporting Toyota. Then you create sales subsidiary. You're not producing, say, in the US or in Australia. You're creating sales subsidiary. Then you go to service facilities. Make sure that if you're selling cars, there is a service facility, otherwise people are not going to drive Japanese cars in my country or your country, whatever. Distribution system is there, then eventually Toyota will say, yeah, I think we don't need to have all this. Let's go and build our factories in America, in many parts of America as they've done it. Let's go to Europe. And licencing is one of the indirect ways of, if you like, trying to put your food into certain countries. So this is how generally the process of becoming a multinational company takes place, but with modern technology, IT. Internet, AI, you can virtually build multinational companies if you want to, not that it's very wise to do it in 1 year or 2 years. You can virtually, if you are operating in America, you can easily become multinational within a few years. It's not as hard as you want to build up a factory of Toyota in Southeast Asia. This is one example of how when technology was, and there a French company started in 1926 in France. It became a superstar by the 1980s in America, but it took them eight generation or two generations. But as I said, these days you don't need necessarily, not always, but not necessarily you should do that. And of course in this context then what we need to know when you know companies are going around the world, so what are the so-called sharks in the ocean attacking, if you like, this particular company, multinational company. The company is basically swimming in the ocean. Sharks are everywhere. The sharks are a financial risk from our perspective, and they are foreign exchange risks. Future exchange rates are unknown, hence revenues and costs are known. Different regulations, restrictions on capital mobility. Sometimes you want to go to a country, there are restrictions. Sometimes you go to a country, they can't take your money back. There are regulations. There are political change, political government change, political upheaval, all kinds of challenges in the context of political risk, risk that foreign governments will directly interfere with or terminate MNC operations. Risk that foreign politics or policy will affect operations, labour strikes, conflict, etc. and it's not uncommon, by the way. You will see it in capital budgeting later on. So there are countries in Latin America where they simply kicked out and they confiscate basically expropriated many American companies' assets. I'm talking about 20 years ago. So it's not we know that it happens, it could happen. And so it's not just the textbook or we're talking about there is a risk always when you are just going to a country beyond OECD, if you like, where you know there is always a risk high return but risk. Excellent. Uh, so, um, what I want to say is that this is what I highlighted in the PowerPoint. How the rest of this course prepares you to develop the knowledge and the skills to be part of the management team of an MNC in the future. And I already explained at the outset of this class various chapters of this book, in particular from Chapter 9 onwards, apply financial risk techniques and hedging instruments that could ensure the operations of MNCs are managed in a way that ensures their resilience, survival, competitiveness. I already said that, so that's the big picture. The next section, sequence of global competition. Sequence of globalisation, foreign competition, perceived job loss, perceived wage erosion, etc. I do not lecture it now. OK. I didn't do it on Monday, yesterday because I need to go to Chapter 2 as soon as I can. That's the most important thing. And I want to say to you there's only not many slides, and if I don't cover anything, you are not going to be examined. So that's my rule. You know that. I will highlight that. The reason I'm just saying here is. The concept of globalisation has changed so much in the last couple of years with geopolitics that you all know that globalisation now, globalisation, go back to basics, build your industrial relations national industrial basically foundation, have industrial policy, national industrial policies. The supply chains during COVID-19 has shaken many countries. We want to go back to our own country. We want to have French shoring, etc. etc. And so not everything that you will look at in these PowerPoints are reflective of reality of what's happening now. So I don't want to get into any political controversy in terms of, you know, I'm saying that globalisation is good, globalisation is bad, because I don't want to take any view of that in this course, so I'm not worried about globalisation was good or bad, but I can tell you, I can tell you, I have said so far the power of the process of globalisation, the great process of globalisation. But what kind of globalisation you have to have to ensure so-called inclusive prosperity for every nation and everyone, it's a philosophical issue, and I can't get myself bogged down into that. So with that in mind, Uh, if you don't mind, I'm going now to move quickly to the next, uh, um, of course you can look at the slide as you wish, as you go, I mean it's already available. Um, and it's not my view, by the way. What's in the PowerPoint is the view of the textbook that you're reading. OK, so that's just also want to be very clear. Uh, chapter 2, determinants of exchange rates. Um, Determines of exchange rates. So what I want to say is um. The very important issue in this course is, and you already have done it maybe in capital capital market. That basically the exchange rate, as I said earlier on, it's very important. We need to know what forces define the value of an exchange rate, what's the value of the Australian dollar against the US dollar, what's the value of the US dollar versus euro, and there are many forces influencing that, and that's where we're going to focus. But we need to define first exchange rate notation. How do we calculate one currency against another in this course. How one currency against another course is defined in the international market outside this course. So there are some of the steps I want to take you and I want you to pay attention, please. So we're looking at exchange rate basics, calculating exchange rates, main factors affecting exchange rates, role of central banks in currency values, fundamentals of central bank intervention. An equilibrium approach to exchange rates. And I may not get to the fundamentals of central bank intervention, and I would not necessarily cover these last two. So if I don't cover the last two topics, it means don't worry. You don't need to send me an email confirmation. I know what I should examine the students, so I just want to be very relaxed about it. Exchange rate basics. What are exchange rates? Foreign exchange notation, that's an important one. The base currency and reference currency, which currency, called, for instance, US dollar, is the US dollar called base currency or reference currency? What does that mean, base currency and reference currency? That is something you need to nail it down today, please. And we do it together, OK, exchange rate systems, you know, different exchange rate systems and computing prices of goods in foreign countries, they all come together very nicely, very easily, OK, so just relax about it. So foreign exchange is often denoted as fx. What is an exchange rate, price of one nation's currency in terms of another nation's currency, represents the cost of exchanging one currency for the other, or purchasing one currency using the other. When we say purchasing one currency to the other. Just let's open up our mind. Have a look at the example here. Examples of price. One loaf of bread, $3.95 US dollars. One gallon of milk, $3.79 US dollars. One pound of beef, $14 US dollars. Then one British pound, $1.65. 1 Swiss franc, 1.117. In other words, in the same way you price bread, meat, whatever we consume, if you like, has a price, the currency of each country has got its own price, which reflects a lot of economic forces, even social forces, even political, of course, political forces, and the stability of the central bank of that country. There are many facets we will cover them. So you have a price for A currency and it goes up and down due to many forces. And one of the things to start with, I want to say is, you know, if suddenly the winter arrived, if you like, yesterday, and so we are going to have more consumption of oranges, I mean, I'm just giving you an example because we need vitamin C, more vitamin C. OK, this is just an example. Don't laugh at me. So what will happen if every one of us wants to have more orange juice? So demand for orange juice goes up. So as demand for orange goes up, what will happen to the price, generally speaking, the more you demand, there is more price. So try to remember it during this course and maybe beyond. One example I give you. If suddenly you don't want to have Apple, there is bad news. These apples are toxic. Something happened or you've got sometimes diseases hitting, if you like, but that disease could make the price go up. But there is bad news about Apple. No one should consume Apple for the next 3 months as an example. What will happen to the price of Apple? So what will happen if someone says, I do not want to hold this, the currency of this country anymore? People panic. I don't want to name any country. I don't want this currency from this country. And not only sometimes happen in the finance, not one country, many countries drop the currencies if you like. Um And so what will happen, the exchange rate collapses during the Asian currency crisis. It happened, absolutely crushed Asian currencies. But the opposite also is true. There are certain countries where their currencies are in high demand. Why? Because of, I mean, I'm going to cover US dollars, euro, Swiss franc, pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar. Yeah, I think I mentioned Chinese currency. So they are reflecting, if you like, the strength of the country and political stability of the countries and the credibility in the financial market. So they are like gold, if you call them. They used to have treated as gold. So these currencies are in high demand. So as more people want to hold to the US dollar. I know this recent last couple of years there are. Everything has changed. Gold price of gold went up, etc. I don't have time to elaborate, but you get what I'm trying to say. But nevertheless, you get demand for US, demand for US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, etc. etc. and they are the reserves that central banks around the world are holding in there as a backup of their own stability if you like. And so that needs to be enshrined in your head that exchange rate goes up and down due to supply and demand. If orange demand for orange is higher, higher price. If more people want to have Swiss franc, as it happens when there is some crisis in America, it happens. Or there is a war in the Middle East, not the current Middle East. In the past it happened. I'm referring to a historical thing. Japanese yen often goes up in value because people buy Japanese yen as a safe haven. Australian dollar goes up. Canadian dollar goes up. That's the reality. I'm not making it up. This is the trend in the past, and I do not talk about current politics. This is my principle at the moment, you know what I mean. So other words, we get stuck here with 500 students. Each of them are sending me an email. Why did you say A, B, C? Exchange rate notation, market intervention. So this, these next two slides are very important. I want you to genuinely pay attention, come back to it, practise it, read it. And I read them mostly because I want to make sure we focus together. Market convention. Exchange rates can be quoted using different conventions. In market convention generally, A B B means the number of units of currency B. Currency B units of currency B per unit of a currency. A one currency, one unit against x units of the other currency. Under this convention, A is the base currency and B is reference currency, so a base currency means one unit of that currency against x units of the other currency, which is called reference currency. It could be more than one, it could be less than one. It could be anything. It doesn't matter, but the base currency you're looking at, what's the price of this currency called, for instance, the euro. What's the price of the euro as a base currency against the US dollar? We say $1.2 by €1. Example Australia US 0.716. This means $1 by 0.716. The Australian dollar is base currency. $1 because Australia is a small economy, we are used to it. We have to listen to it this way, and US dollar is reference currency. However, A number of publications, including textbooks such as the main textbook in this course, Shapiro, use a different notation with the same outcome, of course, don't be worried about it. In the textbook, A by B means the number of units of a currency per unit of B currency. It's just the other way around. One basically unit of B currency against x units of a currency. Under this convention, B becomes base currency. We are not changing definition. We are not changing anything. And A is reference currency, so A is x units of a per one unit of B basically, and this is say B is €1 A is $1.3 or $1.2. Example, here, Australia versus US 1.3955. This means $1 is equal to 1.3955. That's how this notation reads, and you operate on this as some basis when you get questions in tutorial, exam, in your textbook, etc. This can be also written as $1.3955 per one unit of US dollar, which is base currency. Base currency is always one. Once you get it, the rest is easy. No matter how you whether you put it denominator denominator, that's fine. We can work with that. As simple as that. The US dollar is base currency and the Australian dollar is reference currency. Important to note, to avoid confusion, this course follows the text notation, textbook notation that is A over B means number of units of a per unit of B. The textbook also often uses the term home. Home means domestic currency and foreign currency, because the textbook is an American textbook from a US perspective, it usually treats US dollar as domestic or home currency and non-US currencies as foreign currencies. So the textbook often writes home currency versus foreign currency. This means number of home currency units. In other words, 1 units of US dollars when you read the textbook per unit of one foreign currency, which is €1. Generally examples are about the euro, euro versus US dollar. In other words, foreign currency equals base currency plus home currency. Foreign currency means base currency, and home currency means reference currency. For example, US euro 1.2 or 1.2 US is equal to one unit of euro. €1 is 1.2. Can I also say You might say, why don't you, I'm in Australia, why don't you use Australian dollar, Australian textbook? We do not have a textbook. We do have one or two. But because this course is an international course, many of the students of course are also international, not for that reason only. You want to get the scope of global finance, how it works. And we have been traditionally for years been using. You know, American textbook, that's the reality. So I just want to clarify that there's no prejudice or anything like that, but it gives you an exposure when you read The Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, etc. Now, so far so good, wasn't too bad, yeah, these two last two, so let's just keep, keep going. So here this is another very simple. This is not examinable. I have deliberately highlighted in red American European quotations of currencies. Please note that students are not required to know the following definitions for their exams. However, we are covering them for. Informational purposes and it is best not to focus on them as we don't refer to them in this course anymore after this or there is something in next week as well they repeat the same American terms and European terms for exchange rate just again for the presentation to give you the big picture. So the American currency quotation or defined as direct quote shows how many US dollars it takes to purchase one unit of foreign currency. OK, how many units of US dollars will buy one foreign currency, and this is exactly, have a look here, I'll go back to the previous slide. It's exactly what I've shown you about home currency versus foreign currency in North Asia. So you've got $1.2 buys €1. So in effect, The way the notation we use in this course and in the textbook and in many places, it's so-called American terms, American currency quotations. The next one is, on the other hand, the European currency quotation defined as indirect quote shows how much foreign currency is needed to purchase one unit of US dollar. So it's the other way around. So we are saying to you $1.2 will be equivalent to €1. This is American terms. OK, but in European terms they are more global if you like. They want to know how many units of foreign currencies will buy $1. You want to say why. So all I'm trying to do is just to give you the full picture. I don't want you to get overwhelmed. Oh my God, how am I going to remember? All we are going to do is basically mainly focus on what I've just said in the previous slides, but you need to know because you come across $1 equivalent to 100 Japanese yen. It's not uncommon. $1 is equivalent to 5 Mexican pesos. Why? I tell you the story very quickly and then show the slide. The US historically after the Second World War, became the foundation of, if you like, the US dollar became basically reserve currency of the world. The only convertible currency to gold became US dollar, and every other currency like German currency was. Priced against US dollar based on then US versus gold. So gold, for instance, 1 ounce of gold will be equivalent to $35 US dollars. So how many, what would be the price of German currency against this gold versus US dollar? Don't get confused. Don't worry if you don't follow what I'm saying. It's not a big issue. We moved out from that system a while ago. So the US currency, when you read the textbook, it is written to Americans. Mainly, but The US itself with the US currency has got a global status, and you can't avoid it. And so the US dollar acts often like a global currency. So 65% of basically use of currencies around international markets is US dollar. About 25% is euro. The rest are Japanese yen, Swiss franc, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar, etc. then go down rapidly, basically. And the second one is many commodities, oil. Food, agricultural products, many goods are priced in US dollars, so you want to know how many units of my currency. Would buy $1. So everyone is interested in $1 in international setting, you get it for international setting. So it's good to know. And of course liquidity of the market is important. If some crisis happens where often people say people will pull out their money from the US, look at the challenges in the US. One of the crux of this is finance. I'm not getting into the politics of that. One of the key issues here is there is not any market to replace the liquidity of the US dollar. And that is part of, if you like, this process in this context. And so I will repeat now, I said on global dominance, why are many publications, including textbooks, exchange rate, quotations against the US dollar? Global dominance, I already said, reserve currency, international trade. They are trading oil, commodities priced in US dollar, liquidity and stability because the US has the world's largest economy. US dollar is highly liquid, allowing large transactions to take place smoothly and with. Costs. So what you see is $1 versus 5 Mexican pesos, $1 Zimbabwe currency 38 $1 Japanese yen. You see next week in the PowerPoint your doctor, by the way, Colwell will be here. I'm not lecturing in week 234. And there is no lecture on Monday. I know you are here, but I don't think I can just rearrange another one. I'm not lecturing. I'm not trying to go for a shortcut to have a rest, but it's already recorded. I just can't find a room. Suddenly we allow for 5 250, and then we ended up with much less numbers in this context. So basically, You will see again some of some of these examples. No, no, I don't mean next week you will see this example, but I just want to say you will see some of the notation again will appearing next week. One, for instance, is about Danish krone. $1 will buy 7 or 6.5 or 5.6 Danish krone, a small economy, so that's $1 counts on Danish krone. So that's just for your information. OK. How did you go so far? Was it alright? Not complicated. We worked behind the scenes very hard to what you've seen. It's like a movie behind the scenes. We've done a lot of great work. Not me, the team. Just to make sure students are settling very nicely in this course, that's the intention. There is still more foundation. So let's let's keep going. Um, just before I do that, do you want to have a few minutes break, or you, you are OK, we can go? Give me a signal. Yes, a few minutes break or you can go, we can go. I, I don't mind. If you want to break for a few minutes, I can, but I don't want to necessarily do that. I'm flexible. Keep going OK, because you know we've already lost. Yes, so cross rates, this will be covered again briefly next week. The cross rate is the exchange rate between two currencies calculated using a third currency. It is used when the two currencies aren't commonly traded directly against each other. So what it means to get to the crux of the matter. Examples euro versus Australian dollar. So you don't have direct quotation from euro versus Australian dollar, but you have euro versus US dollar again, the third currency. It's raining. Yeah, I can hear too. I have an umbrella. I should be happy probably. Um euro versus US dollar, Australian dollar versus US dollar, then you say, OK, what's the cross rate between euro and Australian dollar? Similarly, Swiss currency versus Japanese yen. What's the Swiss franc against the US dollar? What's Japan's currency yen against the US dollar, then cross rate will be calculated. Australia and New Zealand is the same thing, so that's what it means, cross rate. Keep it as a footnote at the moment until next week. It is not the things we want to focus. Exchange rate systems within the International Monetary System. I will cover the International Monetary System in week 5 when I come back to this class. But suffice to say that in the system after the Second World War when they established the so-called Bretton Woods system, you know, what you see, what I said about gold versus US dollar, they established IMF, they established World Bank, World Trade organisation, which used to have a different name, GAATT, etc. So those days it was everything was fixed rate. We call it PEC system. But in the 1970s, many countries walked away from fixed rate. What it means is my currency, for instance, euro versus US, sorry, no, pound sterling versus euro. I'm sorry, that's again. So many things have changed since the 1970s. Pound against US dollar as an example, basically the pound will buy $1.55 and that 1 pound against 1.55 could remain for virtually a couple of years, even longer after the Second World War. It was fixed. And there are many countries these days that have fixed exchange rate, but they can change it from time to time, including China. Including Australia, where we had our exchange rate fixed until 1983. Whereas Germany, many European countries, they switched in 1970s. We kept it fixed. There's nothing wrong or good or bad. There are strengths and weaknesses of each of these models. But what you need to know. When there is a floating rate, or we call it flexible exchange rate. Means every minute Australian dollar changes, American dollar changes. This is what we mean by floating. By PEC system means set by government, central bank. Increase in par value of a fixed exchange rate is called revaluation. If the price of Chinese currency goes up, it is revalued. Then if the currency goes down, it's devalued. That's the terminology. In the case of flexible exchanges like US, Australia, Canada, if their currency goes up, it appreciates. If it goes down, it depreciates. That's as simple as that. You don't need to worry about some of these issues beyond that. Uh, setting the equilibrium exchange, exchange rate, OK, so I'll just make a start coming here because this is a much better way to explain it. So what you see here is a BMW costs £62,500 sorry. €62,500 in Germany. The current exchange rate is 1.2 against €1. How much does BMW cost in the US dollar? Very simple, €62.5. Multiplied by the exchange rate for US $1.275,000 US dollars. So that's basically, in other words, you are, you are an American, you want to buy European currency, a European car, you exchange your currency. You order for the euro to be able to pay them $62,500. So that's how consumers demand foreign currencies because they want to buy foreign goods. You need to see the connection. Supply, demand for currency goes up for the euro because American consumers want to buy for European goods. When Americans purchased German goods, foreign currency demand is derived from the demand for foreign countries' goods, services, and financial assets. Demand for German cars are already there. OK, just don't worry about that one, this one, because I'm not skipping. It's just this next page is capturing the previous one. There's no point to repeat what I'm going to say. Demand for a currency. So what's the demand already set to you? Apple, orange demand goes up for orange. Consumers want foreign goods, etc. Demand for a currency is a function of demand for foreign goods denominated in that currency. For instance, US demand for Eurozone goods increases demand for euros to pay for those goods. As demand for euros increases, the value of the dollar falls against the euro. Why? Because everyone suddenly wants to have orange. Orange is the euro. So as people want to have German cars and many European cars or many other equipment or whatever luxurious cars, so there is more push for demand. They want their banks to supply them. Euro demand for the euro goes up, the price of the euro goes up, and when the euro goes up, you're talking about exchange rate between euro versus US. So if the euro goes up, the US currency goes down. It's just the way it works. As the value of the dollar falls against the euro, American demands fewer eurozone goods, services, and assets because suddenly the exchange rate goes down. Everyone imported many goods from Europe, so suddenly US currency has gone down. Purchasing power of Americans is lower against foreign goods. That's how it works. Supply of a currency. Supply of euros is a function of eurozone demand for US goods. Eurozone consumers must buy dollars to buy US goods. As the value of the euro increases against the dollar, increased eurozone demands for US goods increases. Demand for dollars which increases the amount of euro supply. So that's again another dimension. So when European currency goes up, they want basically they find American goods cheaper, say by 10%, so they will ask more American goods to come, and so that's another force. So the upshot of the orange that I was telling you price goes up or down, now we bring it to a currency supply and demand for, if you like, the euro. You talk about supply and demand curve, so exchange rate is the price of e. E stands for exchange, that equates supply with demand. So here for instance, we're looking at the quantity of euro based on supply and demand of the euro, which is defined by various purchases, economic growth, interest differential, various economic forces which creates an equilibrium. And this is the initial, we call it exchange rate, e north. You will see this notation, try to remember that. And then next one becomes E1 as the currency goes up or down. So that's the equilibrium. But then There are factors which will influence, in effect, the actual exchange rate. Major Main factors affecting exchange rates inflation differential, economic growth differential, central bank independence. In other words, if people have lost their confidence in the credibility of the currency of that country, people will run away. And if everyone is not going to consume apple, the price of Apple goes down. The price of this particular country's currency goes down. Interest rate differential and political and economic risk. Political and economic risk again has always historically been another big factor. Um, So I just want to show you this graph basically, you know, you've got supply and demand initially. Basically, and there is higher inflation in the US compared to Europe. So what will happen basically as a result of higher inflation, exchange rate move from here E1 to E1. And the way we do it, just very quickly, European buyers purchase fewer US products due to high US inflation. This means that high US inflation leads to a decrease in the supply of euros as fewer goods are purchased from the US. At the same time, higher prices in the US will lead American consumers to substitute Eurozone imports for US products, resulting in a shift in the euro demand curve. This will lead to a new exchange rate where the US dollar depreciates against the euro or the euro appreciates against the dollar. You can read some of the other notes of the PowerPoint. I only read certain areas where I want to really hammer it. So what it means is, as a result of higher inflation in US versus Europe. So the American goods become too expensive, first of all, and Europeans will back away and the American consumers themselves because of inflation. The price has gone up. Foreign goods become too expensive. They also pulled back from importing from Europe because cost of transport went up, fuel went up. There is an inflation, higher inflation like what you see these days in Australia. You've got the price of oil went up. You've got everything is changing, so demand will shift to the right for euro currency, supply will shift to the left. A new equilibrium is established. Your currency moves from 0 to E1. In other words, the euro appreciates and it means if they've gone up by 5%, US dollar has gone down by 5%. That's what it means. Anyway, you've got some, I've got some notes, you read it. I didn't read it also on Monday, just if you want to read them. I'm not, by the way, I'm not tricking you on these sort of issues for the exam, but just you need to know them, that's all. I'm very simple but very important things. And so the next factor which could influence the exchange rate is the interest differential. For instance, suddenly if the US dollar is much higher than the real interest rate in the US, the real interest rate in the US is higher than euro interest rate, so everyone wants to go and invest in the US. That also will influence the exchange rate. OK, so first you need to pay attention to this one for future weeks that I'm not here, but your lecturer will cover it beautifully. A real interest rate is a stated interest rate with the rate of inflation removed from it. You need to understand from nominal interest rate, which is what you read today on the news, but what's the inflation of the country? You have to subtract the inflation from the nominal rate, then this is the real exchange rate. So the real interest rate is stated is a stated interest rate with the rate of inflation removed from it. It reflects the real cost of funds to a borrower and the real yield to a lender or an investor. A real interest rate relates to the rate of time preference for current goods over future goods. It is calculated as the difference between nominal interest rate and inflation. So we say real interest rate is equal to nominal interest rate. In other words, current interest rate as an example in Australia is 6%. So that is what's the inflation 4%. So what's the real interest rate in Australia if you want to invest from Japan or America? 2%, not 6%. You have to take account the current inflation or expected inflation. You know that inflation is going up again, so that's what it means. Assume that in this scenario that. Um I think I explained it rather than reading it. Assume in this case that US real interest rate is 3%, European real interest rate is 1%, so there is a gap of 2%. So what's the reaction of, if you like, skewed investors in Europe? They would say, let's go and buy American securities. I'm getting 2% more real rate of return. So demand for US dollar goes up because everyone wants to invest in securities in the US. Bring the example of orange. What will happen if everyone wants to have orange, not apple? The price of the US dollar goes up, the euro goes down. You know what I mean? It's just demand and supply. And so the impact of the headings says the impact of an increase in the US interest rate on the dollar, on the US dollar versus the euro. What will happen is the bottom line is here we are, I'll just read this last one higher US interest rates directly transfer to better yield on fixed income securities compared to European equivalent, etc. etc. I'm not going to read all of that. I already said it. The consequence of all that is the currency goes up. So this is another factor. Interest differentiation between nations could influence the exchange rate. Economic growth is another one. If you have a dynamic economy in Europe and the US economy is not doing very well, what's the consequence of that? People want to go where a dynamic economy is, if you like, or you want to go to Japan or you want to go to China. I'm just giving you an idea. So economic growth sometimes from one country to another, and often people switch. US dollar economy is doing great. I'm talking about the past. In the past, many things people are shifting investment to the US and similarly, Europe, Japan, and vice versa. So it's a cycle and generally speaking, this will push the exchange of the country which is growing very well, if you like, against other currencies. Political and economic risk factor is the same thing. I don't want you to understand a currency's riskiness depends on a nation's economic and political policies. The more economically and politically stable a nation is, the higher the demand for its currency will be. In times of turmoil, markets flock to stable currencies from economically and politically stable countries such as the US dollar or the Swiss franc. And Japanese yen, Canadian dollar, and Australian dollar. So that's just basically. Are you still awake? I'm so happy I'm up to this milestone in my lecture. This lecture is, you know, just we want to make sure it really lands very well, OK. So I just want to say this red colour says I encourage the students to read only the remaining of these PowerPoints without going back to the textbook or anywhere else to learn what I'm going to say. OK? There is a wisdom behind it. I don't want to explain to you. You don't become more curious. You can go and read the textbook. That's fine, but focus on exactly what we are covering in this lecture on notation. And tutorial questions will be again based on that, and we suddenly start flying together from week next week. That's the intention. You trust me. So, What is home currency depreciation? Foreign currency more valuable than home currency. That's the depreciation. I already said. Conversely, foreign countries' value has appreciated against their home currency. If one currency depreciates, the other currency will appreciate. So I'm back to the same slide, page 6, repeating the same thing. A is a reference currency. B is base currency. So basically here means 1 unit of B, 1 unit of B buys x units of unit 1 unit A. Also recall that textbook often quotes home currency and foreign currency. In this case, home domestic currency, in other words, the US dollar, is a reference currency, and foreign currency where we use euro for simplicity, so you register the concept is a base currency. Change in the value-based currency B. In this case, assume it's euro, so it's E1 minus e north. Remember the diagram I showed you e north E1, the inflation boost the exchange rate from e north to E1. So the new exchange rate of euro against the US is 1 E1 minus e north divided by e north, where e north is old exchange, E1 is new exchange, higher, this is what you pay attention. If E1 is bigger than e North, in other words, the euro has appreciated, the base currency appreciates. If E1 is less than e north, the base currency depreciates, and the converse of that is correct for US dollars. That's all I'm going to say now. The change in the value of reference currency in this case the US dollar E north minus E1 divided by E1. Old exchange rate, new exchange rate. If E1, new exchange rate is bigger than initial exchange rate, reference currency, US dollar depreciates. If E1 is less than the reference currency appreciates great. Now, let's get to the examples and I will cover a few examples. Now that's basically we've done a great job putting it together. That's my intention. So calculating exchange rates. Depending on the current value of the euro relative to the dollar, the amount of euro appreciation or depreciation that could be, for instance, due to higher inflation in the US versus Eurozone is computed as the fractional increase or decrease in the dollar value of the euro. Because we are looking at one unit of euro, for example, if the dollar euro exchange rate goes from €1 from €1 to €1 to 0.93 to. 1.09. In other words, the euro suddenly can buy more American dollars. First initial exchange rate, €1 could buy only $0.93. The next phase, €1 can buy more than $1.01 0.9. The euro is said to have appreciated by the change in its dollar value, which is basically. New, here we are, new dollar value of the euro, old dollar value of the euro divide by the old value of euro. And that is the amount of euro appreciation. Here the figure is shown here. 1.09, which is the new euro here if you're following my arrow. The old one is 0.93 divide by 0.93. It gives you 17.2% appreciation of the euro, and we're repeating the same thing you've just seen here again on this page to make it absolutely understood. So we call it change in base currency euro E1 North. 0. This is called equation 1. The next one for US is called for reference currency it's called equation 2. These two equations are referred to tutorial questions, and you just know exactly what we say or PowerPoints. I already said it in the tutorial questions, or PowerPoints. You don't need to go to the textbook. So base currency substituting the number of the numbers from the previous example 0.93 and 1.09, you get 17.2% euro appreciation. So if the euro has appreciated by 17%, US dollar would have depreciated by a close amount of the same figure. One currency goes up. So alternatively we can calculate the exchange rate in the euro value of the dollar. We can do this by recognising that if the exchange rate equals the dollar value of a euro, €1 as a base currency, $1 per euro, dollars per euro, then the euro value of a dollar, euros per dollar, must be the reciprocal. In other words, 1 over. That's as simple as that. OK. So what we get is we get basically, here reference currency 1 divided by 1 minus 1 divided by e north initial. And if you solve that, you get e north minus e1 divided by e1. This is called equation 2. So what's the difference between equation 1 and 2? Equation 1 says e1 minus e0 divided by e0. Equation 2 says the other way around. Because you are looking at the reciprocal of Europe basically. So here is the equation 1 E1 minus e north e north. Equation 2 is saying just the other way around. So the change in the euro value of the dollar between 00 and 1 equals 1 divided by e1 minus 1 divided by e north in percentage terms. The dollar is said to have depreciated against the euro by a fractional decrease in the euro value of the dollar. That's basically then you plug the numbers 4, you plug the numbers here for e north e1 minus E1 for equation 2. You plug the same exchange rate changes, you get -714.68 depreciation of the euro. Why the figures are not exactly the same? Why is one is appreciated 70%, 1 14%. I didn't want to make it complicated. Don't worry. There are different ways of baseline that each country's currency has started. There are differences in time zone and timing of the baseline. That's where you get a bit of differences, but you do not need to worry about it. What I did, I highlighted this issue in red and I said this is not examinable. If you wish to read more, here are the references, look at it. You don't need to worry about it. You don't need even to think about it. All you need to understand is if one currency goes up by a certain percentage, the other currency goes down close to the other percentage. That's all. Calculating currency appreciation and the depreciation. So now we, we were working on a gear 1 and 2 if you like. We are now going to easy gear of the car. We're giving you a few examples so then you can appreciate very easily what's going on. Here is another example. This is equation 1. We give you a couple of currencies as an example. Example 1, 2002, the yen dropped against the dollar, US against the yen from 0.0086 to 0076. So in other words, How much did the euro depreciate? So in other words, one yen, one Japanese yen is buying suddenly in the next period less 0076 as opposed to 0086. So the value of the euro has declined. So by how much currency has depreciated, you put the new exchange rate. This is the equation. Have a look above equation 1 E1 minus e. You put new new value minus initial value of the exchange rate, divide by initial exchange rate minus 11.97. And if you do that using above aussian calculator, let me just see. Yes, and we do that for the US dollar opposite. So if the euro, if Japanese yen has gone down. By 11.97, what will happen to the US dollar? The reciprocate of the exchange rate. And it becomes e minus e1 divided by e1 equation 2. So if the yen dropped against the dollar from 0086 to 0076, how much did the US appreciate against the Japanese yen? You put basically the reciprocal of that exchange rate here, you get 13.59 appreciation of the US dollar against the Japanese yen. Now the rest becomes boring as I repeat, hopefully you'll say, oh yeah, I know it now. So let's just reinforce it with one or two more examples. Equation one in 2016, the British pound dropped against the dollar, US pound from 1.48 to 1.36. Equal to 1 unit of pound as the base currency. How much did the euro depreciate against? In other words, it's gone from 1.4. You could buy 1.4 US. Now you can borrow only 1.36. So you put equation equation one again, the new basic exchange rate minus initial exchange rate minus 8% depreciation of pound. Next question. What about US dollar if one currency goes up? You use the equation 20 minus e north divided by north. The British pound dropped against the dollar from 1.48 to 1.36. How much did the dollar appreciate against the pound? You put those figures in a reciprocal plus 8.68. You got it, yes. So can I just not repeat for euro, or I repeat that one second. The same example for the euro in 2002, the dollar rose against the euro from 1.2 to 0.98.2%. By how much did the euro depreciate against the US? Again, you put the same equations, off you go, and I don't want to repeat the same thing. For the US it would be the opposite. And then there is another example about Italy. Don't worry, this is an old time of Italy when it wasn't part of the euro. You can just easily ignore it. Great. How was so far? You're happy, you got everything you wanted to hear, you were just good. Last thing, this is the last topic, and it's a very important one as well. Excellent. We've done very well time-wise as well. So the next one is the expectations and the asset model of market model of exchange rate, expectations and asset models. Um, let me tell you, uh, the story. Big picture first. Ah, yeah, I forgot to drink anything. I can see why I'm sort of, uh, mixing up the notation. So give me a chance for a second. So the main issue is, Who sets the exchange rate in a country? Central banks Central banks around the world are very responsible, and that's why the governor or chairman of central banks are so important. Any word coming out of their mouth, it's going to be disseminated everywhere. So, historically, this is, again, I'm just sensitive, I don't want to mention names of countries, OK, I've just always been navigating it for decades in this university. I don't want to mention the names of countries, but this is the issue. So in many still many parts of the world, the central bank governor or chairman is very close to the government of the day, and they're often appointed because we know him or her, basically. And then historically we've seen that the government who wants to be re-elected or they want to make sure they remain popular, they will call the governor of the central bank and say, could you bring the interest rate down a bit because we want to stimulate the economy. Election is coming up in 12 months' time. We want to create jobs. And they're not worried about you bring bring interest rate down means you're going to create inflation down the track, and that will erode people's wealth, jobs, productivity, competitiveness, etc. And so this has been a pattern. Suddenly the central bank drops the exchange rate, the interest rate, and yes, economic activity and it goes on. And this, believe me, this even happened as you will see in Germany. I'm not talking about only developing countries or emerging countries and all that. So in many countries where there are developing countries, emerging countries, developed countries, they have got now these days excellent central banks, independent. They are working completely independent from the government of the day, and what they care is the stability of the currency and inflation to be within the target of 2 to 3%. But the financial market is watching. If one central bank does this or that, or if a president or prime minister says this or that, trying to influence the central bank, the financial market immediately reacts. They will sell those currencies in the financial market, say, they are planning to do something. So everyone now knows, I mean after decades of experiment, disaster, and all that, they can't play around with central banks if they genuinely want to make sure foreigners will come, they will hold to your currency, etc. So that is where basically. Asset market model of market model expectations becomes important. What's the expectation? What's the expectation that US dollar or Japanese yen or Chinese yuan will not collapse tomorrow if I'm telling you now, for instance. You said, Oh, I know that they are solid countries. It wouldn't collapse. Why? Why are you asking me that? Why? Because in the psyche of financial markets and investors and everyone. These countries are very stable. There's not going to be a revolution overnight. It's not going to be anything like that. So this is what they call it expectation of currency, expectation of the central bank of the country, and the fact that they will act with responsibility and with due diligence. So that is the crux of the matter of the central banks, generally speaking, and therefore certain also currencies, currencies as I already mentioned, have become as good as gold. I already mentioned all the US currency, pound, Australian euro, Chinese currency, you know, the Swiss, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar, etc. If I miss one or two, so forget it. I mean I'm just there things come to my mind right now. And so they are holding these currencies as part of their reserve in central banks of the countries, but what happened in recent years, I didn't mention it to you or I didn't mention it yet, in recent years, due to geopolitics of the world and so many things happening so rapidly around the world, central banks gradually moved away from US and other currencies. They are buying gold. Because they want to protect themselves against potential future geopolitics, potential unexpected inflation, potential loss of confidence in countries, you know, you've got all kinds of scenarios. And so suddenly when we're looking at 12 months ago, what proportion of all this demand for gold is going from central banks. My God, my goodness. Major central banks buying it. And so that historically again, you know, Bank of England, I can remember. Maybe 20 years ago. They sold in trucks the gold which were held in the Central Bank of Bank of England. They didn't want gold. They said all we want to care is we hold foreign currencies here. These foreign currencies are as good as gold. Gold is old fashioned reserve, if you like, for financial stability. And by the way, gold, the standard in the 19th century the whole system was revolved around gold, but then they ran out of gold and the global economy expanded 20 times, 100 times faster. That's why we gave up. But that's the reality of the central banks. So what you're going to see here is basically saying central banks are important, their message is important, their independence is important, and they are the ones that can make sure inflation remains low, therefore the exchange rate remains competitive. That's the point. Off we go, central bank reputation, currency value. Central bank uses instruments of monetary policy to achieve three primary outcomes price stability, low interest rate target currency, and in many countries, including Australia, America, and other countries, full employment is their mandate. You can't just be too blind on your instrument, but you have to take into account the prosperity of the workers, etc. Thus central banks' actions influence all of the factors that impact currency value because expectations of central bank behaviour are important, reputation is important. If central bank creates too much money, inflation will occur and currency value will fall. Thus, currencies of central banks with a favourable record of protecting a currency's purchasing power sell at a premium gold. Conversely, currencies of central banks with a poor record trade at a discount. Central bank independence is critical in determining soundness of monetary policy. I'll go to the next one. Central banks adopt mandates for price stability that are veritable, very feasible, unambiguous, and enforceability. Absence of mandates creates the risk of political influence in central bank activities. Non-independent central banks may be forced to monetize the deficit, in other words, print money. Because someone told them to do that, print money, monetize the deficit by buying government debt with newly created money. For instance, this is very interesting historically. In 1920, Germany resorted to inflation to fund the First World War. Reparations to the allies in 1923, it took 4 bank notes of that figure to buy a loaf of bread in Germany. People used to take their luggage to shopping with basically notes because inflation was terrible, and that changed the psyche of Germans. They are so restrict about inflation, and Bundesbank is virtually one of the very best banks in the world. They don't want inflation. They already burned their fingers. They saw the consequences of that on the economy, basically. Here a very beautiful graph produced of course here is not mine, of course you can imagine very beautiful in the sense that central central bank independence on vertical axis inflation 1970 to 1922 on the vertical axis central bank independence. So what you see on the independence, you see countries like Germany, Switzerland, Austria, the Netherlands, the United States, Denmark, Canada. Luxembourg, Sweden, etc. I don't know, Japan. The story goes on And then other countries, Indonesia, Portugal, Greece, South Africa, etc. etc. they are on high inflation, lower independence if you like. In Australia, we didn't have an independent central bank. I should have checked it but I would say roughly about 20 years ago we've switched to an independent central bank. And the reason why Australia is ranked here a bit not independent and the United Kingdom, the same, they didn't have the same independence as US and Japan and Bundesbank. They are on this side where their rate of independence is a bit smaller. Is a higher inflation because the data collected is 1970 to 2022, whereas our central bank in Australia is absolutely gold standard in Asia Pacific. When the governor of Australia talks, people are listening in Asia, in the world, of course, but in Asia as well. I'm just saying in the region. So we've done extremely well in this for the last 20 years and many other countries who were emulated. The same principle of independence, whether it's developing, emerging, it doesn't really matter. They've done a great job. Fundamentals of central bank intervention. I'm towards the end of my lecture. Real exchange rates and relative competitiveness, foreign exchange market intervention. All I want to say is I'm not covering this section for exam. But I just want you to know this, this diagram and the next, and that is, it says high currency appreciation or depreciation, a mixed blessing. Home currency appreciation. If you have a strong US dollars, in brief, I don't want you to memorise anything for the exam, OK, just listen to what I'm saying. If The advantage of appreciation of the US dollar is dollar price of imports fall. Everything becomes cheaper for Americans. They buy. On the other side, there's an advantages US exports become less competitive in foreign markets. Foreigners have to pay 10% more because the US dollar has gone up by 10%. American consumers are paying 10% less importing. So it's not a one-way direction. Dollar prices. OK, I'll read the next one that you can appreciate. Lower import prices put downward pressure on prices of competing US products, reducing domestic inflation, but the US loses jobs in the US traded goods sector, etc. etc. So that's just for just saying that I have touched that, not for your exam, but so you get a sense of when central banks. Do something with the exchange rate and inflation, it does affect the competitiveness of the country. Thank you so much and oh guys, I promise, bear with me for only one second, I promise, James, you know, business school pass, it's on the model. He gave me the PowerPoint to tell you, you already know about it. Here is his photo, very handsome with tie. James Wee, and then he has got pass is flexible, social, etc. etc. and then when I read it yesterday, I didn't know what he put here. He says if you attend, deepen your understanding, of course, and then he says improve your grades. I didn't know he squeezed that. I don't think anyone will do that. And if he intends to do that, come and report it to me. I'm joking, but I don't know whether he got the magic that he knows how to make a great hire. But nevertheless, it's a good marketing. Please attend his class and the class are, as you can see, next week on Monday 2 to 3 p.m. Business 105. Thank you so much. And my apologies again. Thank you for helping me. That's really great.

SPEAKER 1
I have a question. One of them is about the content, the other one is about a specific part.

SPEAKER 0
Yeah, let me just speak because they want me to leave. They sent us a report yesterday that you should leave because the next lecturer is coming, which is fair, I think. Um, No, no, I want to log out. I think it's this one. Was it that? Ah, OK, so the system is different. OK, I haven't been here. I don't know restart, maybe. Yeah, yeah, that's right. Good. So let me pack here so that yeah. So they can just basically come and set up and then I took my, yeah, OK. No, no, I've got it. Oh yes. Thank you. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Thank you so much. Sorry to be late. I'll put this one to charge for the next speaker and then turn this one off. Excellent. Let's just come here. So tell me, yeah, um, two questions. First of all, I'm just listening.

SPEAKER 1
I just want to make sure I don't lose any um, in terms, in the context of yeah. Yeah, I don't why was that Oh thank you. What is this. 1 the there are wars in Ukraine and Russia. It was shocking. I don't know if there is a war. amount of currency because people run away. They say it's unmistakable. There's no certainty about the future of this country. We get pulled out by investment. We invested they pull out in someone's investment, of course this is. Depends on the war, how long it takes, that's what, what's the point? OK, um OK. Because many textbooks are using what we, the TD textbook. Then why, why not? This is for the very reason I said because $1 as reserve currency is only $1 against next unit of $5000. Like that's one international and some people use that, but then the others are. Is it American terms we use American terms. Some people use European terms. That's right. Thank you for your help. That was very good. Thank you so much. OK, let's go out and. Leaving. the Yeah. That 2 seats.
