SPEAKER 0
Uh, hi, I think we're ready to go. It's about 5 minutes after the hour. Sorry, is my voice going again? Uh jeez. Um, thanks for coming. Nice to see you. It's a nice sunny day. Um, so we're, um, we're in, uh, chapter, well, I might as well tell you yesterday, so the, I thought the lecture went all right, but, uh, and the, the recording appeared on Mule, but no sound at all, absolutely not a people of sound, so this better work. are, are in trouble and uh, you know. I use the handheld mic. I don't, I don't see anything that I did differently, so. This is what I did last week. I'll try. See what this does. Let me do one other thing. Well, I'll try that to see what that does, but anyway, we should be OK. OK, um, So we're in, uh, uh, I don't know if you remember, it's ridiculous, but I have to. Take off my glasses for this. Um, so, um, last week, uh, because we're a bit pressed for time, we had to finish PPP last week, so I skipped the first, um, I first skipped the first, you know, 15 slides or so from chapter 6. So I'll, uh, I'll go to the, uh, to those first few slides, and then, uh, we should go through that pretty quickly. They're just kinda. Discussions and then we'll start at slide 22 of chapter 4. So as I say, we did purchasing power parity at the beginning of chapter 4 and uh so today we'll uh finish chapter 4. Any questions before I get started? Any, uh, Any dramas, uh, things going smoothly? OK, cool. Well, um, so let's go, and as usual, I'll scroll back and forth between, um, my extra proofs and comments and the actual, the regular slides. Uh, I think that's working OK for me. I hope it doesn't, I hope it works all right for you guys. But, um, and, and you saw the, and you saw the comments for people who missed last week, these notes do not contain new examinable material. I'm elaborating what's in the lecture notes. I have extra explanations and examples, even some mathematical derivations that are not examinable. I'll refer to them in class, but you can ignore them if you don't find them useful. So standard legal disclaimer, I suppose, sounds very legalistic, but let's, let's get going. So, um So what we're doing in this in these few pages here, um, sorry about that, uh, we're just looking at the markets, looking at the size of the exchange markets, and if just a few general details about these markets. So why do we have these markets? Well, because we wanna purchase goods and services in different countries, and, uh, OK, let me get, uh, to do. Drawing and so on. I like to, I like to draw on the thing. Uh, so, uh, Exports of goods and services for selected countries is percent of GDP. So you can look at this, I mean, um, 11% of US GDP comes from exporting. These are exports. Where does it say exports again? These exports. I can do imports as well. I've got. That slide, um, is it here? Yeah, the imports are almost the same, 14% for the US. They go up to in the thirties for the other countries. It's a big chunk. It's a big percent of, um, their GDP, their total GDP, 18% in Aus in in Japan, about 30% for these countries, 47% for Germany. And um but this is sort of a brag, this is a, you know, a finance brag. However, 95% of all of all FX foreign exchange transactions are not related to trade but to cross border purchases and sales of assets. So here we've got, so just let me make it clear, these are goods and services, that's basically trade. When we talk about goods and services services, we're talking about trade. But there's much more going on in these other markets, uh, so purchases and sales of assets. We're talking about assets. So it's not just goods and services, it's about buying and selling stocks and bonds in different countries. It's like it's about buying land in different countries, property, uh, starting up subsidiaries in different countries. Those are assets that don't go into the trade. Bucket, you know, they're, they're not considered, uh, trade, so there's much more money there. So this is finance part. So, so trade is what they teach in economics and, uh, we're doing in finance has a much bigger impact in monetary in dollar terms, in monetary terms. So, uh, so this is a bit of a brag. No disrespect to economics. Some of my best friends are economists and I, I don't, you know, I don't like putting down other, uh. Other, uh, schools or faculties and so on, but this is, that's the intention of this slide just to, you know, give a bit of a brag about how, how, uh, how big a deal, uh, finance is. There's another point here about uh this next point is about how markets have changed in the last few years. Uh, it used to be. Uh, dealer to dealer, and that meant mostly large banks and large, uh, large banks interacting with one another, but now we're getting, uh, sort of customers involved. So dealer, so what is a dealer? Um, a dealer is typically, typically one of the large banks, you know, the big, big ones, JPMorgan and so on, could be other large financial institutions acting like banks. And what they do is they quote prices, they quote Pes spreads, and they stand ready to trade. They, they promise that they will trade at those prices. So their dealers are sometimes called market makers as well. It's another terminology. So customers are sort of anybody else. They can be corporations like Apple, Toyota, investment funds, governments and central banks, smaller banks that don't act like dealers, and even individual traders. Um, and so why is this happening more and more? Uh, why, why don't banks dominate as much as they used to? Partly because of electronic trading. I mean, it's easier for other people to get involved because everything's done electronically. Oh sorry, the volume's OK? Is it OK if I do that? No, it's not. I have to be careful, uh, the, the lapel, as I see. I can't make it work. Hi, I'm sorry. I hope we're not too late. Uh, OK. Don't worry, um. And so it's a point because uh electronic trading, other people getting involved, uh, hedge funds and asset managers are growing, uh, corporate corporations are becoming more active, and the one that I like, the kind of the big one is has to do with the regulation change that happened after the global financial crisis. You guys remember that? Let me think. How old were you guys? I was, I remember that that was a, a dark time for finance types. We, we look bad. So anyway, Uh, anyway, but, uh, so after the crisis they wanted to make banks, uh, safer and so they required that they hold high quality liquid assets when taking foreign exchange risk and, um, that's known as the liquidity coverage ratio. Um, similar to capital adequacy, so, so they have to put money into this, uh, you know, put assets into some safe place so they can't use those assets to, to make money, and, um, so if they're, if they're doing these FX trades, they, they have to, you know, store all this other money that, that, uh, doesn't, isn't productive for them. So there's a, so banks aren't doing as much, playing as much of this type of role. We'll see this again a little bit later in this, uh, in this slide, in this, uh, few slides. Sorry, honestly, it's, it's allergic to, um. I'm allergic to um Australia. And, and you can see the composition of the foreign exchange market. I like this sort of non-reporting banks that just looks slightly dodgy, doesn't it? Non-reporting banks are not necessarily illegal, they're not, uh, unlicensed. They're not, they're, they're, um, uh, they're not evading regulation. Uh, the main thing is they're not required to make reports to things like central banks, financial regulators, especially the big one is the Bank for International Settlement. So it may just be that they fall below reporting thresholds or they're located in some jus jurisdiction with different reporting rules or uh or uh that sort of thing. So, so non-reporting banks uh are in there as well and it's not a dodgy thing. Um, so yes, we have some just general slides about how big the markets are and, and, uh, where, where the biggest influencers are. Um, these are the top 10 foreign, foreign exchange traders by market share, and, um, they're almost all US, so, uh, the Deutsche Bank is from Germany, UBS is Swiss, and XTX is, uh, in London, but all the others are US, uh, US banks. So, um, so anyway. Uh, as you know, I'm Canadian, so, uh, you know, we all get a bit tired of the US dominating things, but you know, this is, this is a fact. They, they, they're an important market. Um, this slide, I'll, I'll kind of, it's not a big deal this particular one. It shows how the transactions go. Um, one thing is that, uh, major banks can use, uh, brokers, foreign exchange brokers. They just match, uh, counterparties. They, they help find counterparties and help match them, but the, but the banks actually, um, actually do the, uh, uh, do the deals. And this thing here, it's not, not completely appropriate. IMM Life and PSE, these are actually, uh, derivatives exchanges. So, um, it's not pure FX exchanges. These are exchanges for, um, you know, FX forwards, swaps, and, uh, and for futures and, um, uh, options, uh, IMM. Is part of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, which is a huge derivatives market, you know, they, they, they've been very influential and done a lot of stuff. Life, I had to Google that. It's pronounced Life, uh, that's in London and PSC, uh, used to be in, uh, sort of California, but now it's part of the New York Stock Exchange. So those are more, so those, those are more about, uh, derivatives than pure FX. Trades, but um, but that's that's what this slide is trying to do. And um so one of the biggest trading centres, turns out London is the biggest one, isn't that interesting? So I'm gonna mention this a bit later. I mean, you know, uh, the US dominates in a lot of these areas, but London is a great has a has a lot of, a lot of trading desks for foreign exchange and um I think one reason, so the only one that I, that really stuck with me is that, uh, it's, it's, you know, sort of between Asia and, and, uh, and the US in a way, so it may be a little bit more convenient in that sense, but they've just, they've just done a good job of, uh, you know, of, of creating, uh, uh, desks, creating desks for this sort of thing. Um, and this shows how the, um, global FX exchanges have grown over time, and these are great, these are impressive, um, it's these comments here, it's by far the largest financial market in the world. Uh, the daily volume of FX foreign exchange is 30 times the daily world GDP and then 13 times the average daily takeover turnover, sorry, of all equity stock markets put together. Isn't that amazing? That surprised me. I, I'm, I've taught courses on interest rate risk and I thought the interest rate markets ruled, but, uh, but anyway, there's, there's, uh, these foreign exchange markets are huge. Um, trading hours, this is just, you know, just to show that, um, there's, there's trading somewhere in the world, uh, 24 hours a day from Auckland to New York, uh, any hour of the day there will be, uh, trades. And I sort of like, uh, I just wanted to look up what UTC refers to. It's, it's like, uh, maybe you know this, maybe everyone knows this, but it's, it's like Greenwich Mean Time. It's all based on, you know, the the standard Greenwich Mean Time which goes more or less through London, and, but the UTC is not affected by, uh, daylight savings time, and it's really based on atomic clocks. It's really precise, really, uh, very precise. The these trades are, uh. Yeah, there, there, there, there's a lot of uh uh precision going on. Another quick side slide, um, this is number of quotes, that's a quote index says index, yeah. At, at, uh, different times during the day to show where most activity is, and I just wanna mention that, um, quotes are not the same as trades, so, uh, so that, you know, it doesn't give you a scale on the, the, the vertical axis, but, uh, quotes are not the same as trade. There can be thousands of quotes per second, like even more than thousands. It's, it's wild, um, uh, but that doesn't mean there are thousands of trades. They don't, don't, they're just constantly updating these, uh, quotes. And the point they're making is about the witching hour. That's when, uh, New York closes and before Tokyo opens, that's this part right here, that's, that's where there's a lull, lull, you know, New York is stopping. Tokyo hasn't opened up and so there's, there's a brief period there where there's not much happening. So you can go to the bathroom Oh yeah, well I was in a. Oh boy, should I waste the time? Yeah, I was at a wedding once a long time ago, and, uh, at the reception I sat next to one of our PhD students and he was working in industry and he said, yeah, after the reception he has to go to work to, to check his deltas or something like that. But, uh, but yeah, he was in Sydney trading on the European, uh, European exchanges, so yeah, some people don't get a lot of sleep. Uh, another way of measuring, uh, who's got influence, uh, what are the leading currencies, and so you can see the US dollar. Uh, dominates 88.4% of the share. A foreign exchange trading volume is uh is uh involves US dollars. So that's, it's a huge, really a dominant sort of position. Uh, these numbers, if you're curious, they add, add up to 200% because, uh, for each quote you, you, you refer to two countries. So, um, so but it's still, you can see it's a huge, it has a huge impact. I'm gonna come back to this in a minute too. There's something kind of. Funny, uh, that I wanna mention. OK, and the, the last slide on this is just, uh, just sort of a fact that, um, in the US, so I'm reading, I'm just reading right here. Um, we're all foreign exchange. So, uh, all foreign exchange transactions involving dollars have to be cleared in the US. And the electronic funds transfers uh go through this CHIP system clearing house interbank payment system. So that's, that's a nice sort of a bit of trivia I guess you could say, um, so, um, so one last fact and then, and, um, the thing that I found interesting about this, maybe, maybe you, uh, don't find it interesting, but, uh, but so, so the US dollar is by far the most commonly traded currency, every one of those trades. Uh, uh, the transaction has to be cleared in the US, but for some reason, um, going back to this one, for some reason, London has the biggest, um, trading centre. So that seemed strange to me, and, uh, and the subtlety is there's a, there's a difference, I hope I'm getting this right, but there's a difference between, uh, uh, trade and clearing. They're they're done separately, so trades can happen in London and, and you know we can have US US banks with desks in London. Trains can happen with London and but they get cleared in the US and it and it still means that uh uh uh London has the biggest uh trading centre. How's that for a subtle, subtle detail. So, uh, to me that was a minor mystery in a. And uh uh we've solved the mystery. OK. So as I say, just a quick discussion, nothing um too severe there. But um, but now, now we can move to, if there are no questions, we can move to chapter 4. OK, and it's chapter 4 slide 22. You're good to go. OK. OK So what we're doing now is called the Fisher effect, um, and then we'll do the generalised Fisher effect approximations and empirical evidence that's basically the rest of the chapter. So let me go to my. Comments about this, it's this one, right? There we go, yeah, um. OK, oh man, so I think maybe can I do this? Well, maybe I don't have to, OK, so it just it just. Excuse me, amen. Terrible. This is a, this is a slide I put up last week as well, um, it's from, uh, week 1, chapter 2. And its main factors affecting exchange rates. Last week we discussed inflation differentials that was purchasing power parity. And this week we're looking at interest rate differentials. This is the Fisher effect and also forwards, uh uh uh currency forwards. So that's what that's sort of where it fits into this kind of thing. So remember what we, we know already, just a quick review we know, uh, purchasing power parity. This is slide 15 from last week. We start with the fact that prices should be the same in each currency and then solve for the currency and we see how the currency relates to price levels in the home country divided by price levels in a foreign country, and then we look at how that affects price exchange rates over time and you just allow prices to grow at the in this case, I is in inflation, so prices grow in the home country. At at the home inflation rate and prices prices grow in a foreign country at the foreign inflation rate and so as we have this expression for sort of future, um, currency prices. And uh we're gonna do something very similar today except um instead of um instead of inflation rates we'll have interest rates here. And um that'll be called the International Fisher effect, very similar equation. And then we'll also look at forwards which have the exactly the same equation as the International Fisher effect. So we have three very influential, very similar, maybe almost confusingly similar equations. And it's a nice way and so don't forget our math result. Um, so as I, so if you have. Uh, 1 + X, 1 + Y equals call that 1 + A, and, um, and these numbers have to be small. These numbers are reasonably small. Then this funny looking thing 1 + X 1 + Y minus 1 is approximately X minus Y. We used this last, last week. Here's, here's a classic case. Take, take returns on, um, on the exchange rate and use, um, and we're using, uh, PPP right here. You end up getting with exactly that kind of a calculation and um so the weird ratio with the 1 + H's 1 + I's minus 1 that just becomes uh the interest rate, the inflation rate. Differential And we have the same thing today, same sort of calculations, but we'll have interest rate differentials there. So hopefully this will look uh very familiar as we go as we go forward. OK. A few slides. So the Fisher effects were, OK, so the idea is. The nominal interest rate equals. Uh, there's a real return plus inflation. And so the normal rate is just what you get from the bank. But, um, but there's an inflation component and then there's a real effective return. Have you've seen this in other classes, real, real returns in other classes, but anyway, this is, this is why you take this course. Um, so the nominal rate of return, so, so it's up here. The nominal rate, did I lose it? What happened? It should be there. Um, yes, so the nominal rate equals the real rate plus, uh, expected inflation. The normal rate is just the percent you get when you go to a bank. And the real rate of return, it has to do with the percentage change in purchasing power from an investment is a change, uh, change in what you can buy with those dollars, and they've written everything, uh, like this. So let me, let me go to my little example here. I got this from a friend of mine years ago. So now you know I have at least one friend. Um, this is, uh, suppose you have a can of Coke that costs $2 right now at day zero, and with inflation we expect it to cost $210 in a year, so the inflation rate is 5%. The change in the price, the percent change in the price from $200 to 210 is 5%. And we're also told that the one year nominal interest rate is 9%, so you can, you can. Put money in the bank and get 9% at the moment. Not anymore, but uh yeah. So if you buy 100 Cokes today, you pay $200. If you invest 100 $200 for a year, you end up with, uh, that grows by 9%, so you get $218. And since the can of Coke increases to $210 that it goes, that's, that's a 5% increase. Then how many cans of Coke you can buy, you take, uh, the, the dollars you have divided by the price price per can you get 103.81 cans. And so that 3.81% is what we call. and see, here's how we calculated it, and that's called the real interest rate. It's called the real interest rate. So in terms, so I mean the nominal rate is 8%, but our, our purchasing power only increases by 3.81% when you allow for inflation. So that's that's the exact calculation and what we did was just exactly this kind of thing we saw in previous slides. A is, is the for some reason the letter we use for the uh the um the real interest rate. And it's just, you know, you see it, it grows when the nominal rate goes, goes up but decreases when inflation goes up. And um And um you can cross multiply to get this expression. So I'll slide back quickly. That is, yeah, see that's. So we've shown where that comes from. And uh and then the other thing, one more slide. Um, this is the Fisher effect, and, and if you take, OK, so we have 1 plus A equals that ratio there, when we solve for A, we get that ratio minus 1, and our math results said that that's approximately. That you know R minus i. So, so in this example, um, so R is 9%, can I get rid of some of these things? What's R minus I? R is 9%. Inflation is 5%. 9 minus 5 is 4% and so then this is close to 4%, so the real rate, you know, 4% is a good approximation. We'll see a few examples like that. OK. There we go. So that's explained uh this slide, and we got everything here. All right. I can delete some of these things, I think. OK, this is just a numerical example, just a straight numerical example, uh, I already did one, but, uh, now, um, so bond returns are 10%. And um We assume that there's only one good, well, inflation is, is 1%. Do the calculation, we find that the real return is 8.99%. So we're just doing a few practise examples and you can see if we just take 10% minus 1%, you get 9% and that is close to close to the other calculation. And there's one more. I don't see there's nothing, nothing new here as well. Well, they're asking you if you earn 6% per year in a savings account and inflation is 2%, uh, what's the nominal rate? What's the real rate? Nominal rate is 6%. Um, anyway, yeah, I, I, I like. This expression here that's that's the way to solve for a. We have 1.06 on the top. That increases the real rate. The 2% decreases it, and inflation decreases it, and you get 3.92%. So, so 6 minus 2 is 4. So again. Um, it's approximately. Or uh or minus. A. Real, real rates and so on. Um, now there's a generalised Fisher effect. OK, so now we're getting into some, uh, sort of economics. We assume that real rates are equalised across countries, so that's a big assumption. Uh, that's a, that's a big assumption, and it's, it's not always true. We'll see cases where it's not always true, but it seems quite reasonable, um. If, if real rates were higher in one country, everybody would invest in that country because, because that country would give better um purchasing power over time, you know, it would have the best purchasing power and people would want to move there. So it seems kind of reasonable to assume that it's real returns that are equal across different countries. And so if that's the case, so they, they give you, they throw, throw you this equation. I'll um. It's only, I'm only adding another step here, but so what we're saying that is that in the home country, 1 plus A in the home country equals that ratio. 1 plus RH and um and that's equal to 1 plus AF in the foreign country. So those two, those two ratios are the same. So it seems reasonable that those two ratios should be the same uh in all countries across the world. So that's, so that is this expression right here. You know, very quick, not, not very complicated math, and then, and then you sort of cross multiply, you know, you, you, you move, um. You swap those two terms, and then you get a ratio of 1 plus the two interest rates equal to the ratio of the same value for the inflation rates, and uh that's a huge, that's a huge surprise, it's kind of a huge result. And so if we look at right here, we've got purchasing power parity. is given by this expression. It's, uh, you know, the, the current, the current exchange rate. And uh it goes up with inflation in the home country and down with inflation in the foreign country and we just showed that that those two ratios are the same. You can replace um I with interest rates, replace inflation with interest rates in this calculation. Is that cool? And um and so very similar formula, and but now this involves uh interest rates and this is called the international uh Fisher effect. I go back? Anyway, so they didn't add that last step here, but, but, um, but this, you know. That is, that is the key thing. Looks just like purchasing power parity. No, it involves interest rate differentials instead of inflation differentials, OK. OK. So we've got a graph here. Let me see. I flipped up this graph. Yesterday something just threw me. um, so what do we have? We've got. 00 yeah, so why do we look at RH minus RF. And I minus IF. Um That's, you know, OK. So, um, From equation OK, so, so we know that these things are supposed to be equal. Uh, the ratio involving the interest rates is the same as the ratio involving inflation. So that's assuming the assumption there is that real returns are equal across countries. So from our math results, uh, you know, we subtract one from both of these things and then we get that RH minus F is approximately IH minus IF. RH minus RF is approximately. I minus IF, is that right? So that's a way of sort of it's a nice way of getting rid of the ratios there and deal with simple sort of linear things, and that's what we've got. That's why we have the thing that I've circled there. The difference in the nominal rates should be the same as the difference in inflation rates. Yeah, it's a normal rate too, it's not even the real rate. OK, so, um, so there's the parity line. Everybody in equilibrium, everybody should be on that parity line if we're right about, uh, the Fisher effect. Um, so at point C here. Um, you're Let's see. Oops, where? Oh, go, we had to go back in. Point C, everything's fine, um. The higher rate of inflation in the foreign country was 2%. It's offset by the uh. By the lower currency rate anyway, everything's fine here. The, um, yes, this, this difference is -2 and this difference is -2. You're, you're on the, you're on the right graph. So what happens in D. So you can see that um uh this value is lower than that value. So D, the real rate of return, so and and. Let me see that that relates to the real rate of return now. Do I have this one? So this is my, yeah, this is my way of explaining this. It looks more complicated than it needs to be, but um, so the, the real rates of return. Let's see now, so we have The real rates of sorry, sorry, so the real rates of return are equal in the two cases they're supposed to be equal. that's, that's what we've just, uh, we've just decided and, um, and at point B. I don't know if you like all these math details. I, I hate staring at, uh, a graph when things aren't being explained. Point D, um, RH minus RF is equal to -3. Do I have that here? RH minus RF is equal to -3. IH minus IF is equal to -2. Can you do that again? So, um, So the change in ours is -3, change in I's is -2. I rewrite those two equations. The first one is RH. Plus 3 is equal to RF and the second one is IH + 2 is equal to uh I. I So IH + 2 is equal to IF, and we're gonna subtract those two equations. We get that um This is equal to 1 plus that. That I'm sorry, so these are real rates now. You see, the foreign country has a higher real rate. This real rate is 1 plus the home real rate. Does that make sense? The, uh, the foreign country has a real rate that's one plus the, uh, home country's real rate. And so you can sort of, I mean, you know, you can, you can see this here you're in the wrong place, uh, you, you have to move up and uh and the reason for that is that um. And and you will, and things will move up because um. Um, you know, you're, you're happy to be in the, um. Uh, the, uh, the foreign country, but it's got to move up, um, because The um Well, how do we explain that? OK, so the real rate of return in the home country is 1% lower than in the foreign country. An inflation differential of 2% compared to the interest rate differential of 3%. As a result, funds should flow from the home country to the foreign country to take advantage of the real differential, and this will continue until expected real returns are again equal. OK, does that make sense? So that's the, uh, that's the argument. It's, it's out of equilibrium and um. It's out of equilibrium and rates have to And the um And this number has to go up. Is there another way of doing that? Let me think. Sorry, I'm spazzing again. I had, that was the same slide that screwed me up yesterday. Um, so I, so I take a minute, um, if you're, no, I don't think. No, maybe not, maybe it's not the time. Anyway. If I can If I can find a better way to clarify that, I'll, I'll add some more comments later, but anyway. Same thing, it's crazy. Um, what about empirical evidence? For the Fisher effect, let's do a graph of inflation and inflation rates versus short-term interest rates. And you see it's pretty much a straight line, so that's what you get if um. I am um If um The real, the real rate is more or less constant, so it's not perfect, of course, but um it's not bad. Countries with higher inflation rates tend to have higher nominal rates, so this, this, the main point is the differentials in real estate, real rates of return between countries are small. Yeah. Mhm Nominal rates versus inflation rates. Countries with higher inflation rates have higher nominal rates, and that's what you expect if um if uh the real rates are, are constant. Um, there's a bit more to that. Uh, let's see, let me do this now. There is a thing that, um, And, and does that come up later? market integration. I think, I think I'll save that for this slide. I think it's closer to that side, OK, OK. Let, let's, let's go on to the next one. This one is about, um, market segmentation. We have the supply and demand curves. Um, what we're really saying is that, um. OK, empirical evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that most variation in nominal rates is attributed to differences in inflationary expectations. Interest rate differentials could not survive in internationalised capital markets. If there was market segmentation, if for some reason, um, people didn't move between, uh, countries, move money between countries the way you would expect, then you'd have, we have, we have supply curves. These are supply curves for credit and demand curves. Um, who's supplying credit and who's, who's demanding credit, and, um, and as a function of the real interest rate, and if, if you can't move between, uh, countries, then you'll have different equilibria in, uh, in, in different countries. But, um, but as soon as countries become integrated, then the total demand gets added up and and you just get 11, Equilibrium point. So anyway. So if the in the US, the real rate is higher than the rest of the world, once the market opens up, there will be a shift of US credit to the rest of the world. This indicates that the real rate in the US will fall. While the real interest rate in the rest of the world will rise, ultimately leading to a new equilibrium as the graphs show. So, there is a slight, say the US is, is a bit higher. Then this case, and when they come together, they end up at an intermediate point. So demand for credits globally will increase the real rate in an integrated market. However, real rates, uh, difference can persist if investors prefer to hold on to their domestic assets and avoid exposure to exchange risks. This graph indicate indicates that. OK, this is the last one. Yeah, this is the last one. OK. So this is now the nominal short-term rate versus. The real short term rate And that's, um, it's also, you know, fairly close to being a straight line, but the point I want to make is, um, sort of real interest rates versus nominal for 25 developed and developing countries plus the eurozone. So, uh, and one thing that happens is I wanna look at these two points here. In developing countries, there are greater expectations for higher inflation. You expect higher inflation in developing countries. That's just sort of a, a fact of life because of their monetary policy and, uh, and so on, they, they tend to have higher inflation. Therefore, real short term rates tend to be higher as well. If inflation goes up, the short-term rate, uh, goes up as well. Currency controls and other political risks. That you also get. The second point here, there, there's also a political risk. So there can be, uh, uh, it mentions it here, there can be currency controls and other measures, um, that will expose that impose political risks. People aren't allowed to take money out of the country and things like that. And, uh, and if there are political risk and also default risk and so on, so people also demand a higher interest rate because of the riskiness, and that will even lead to higher real. Real returns, higher expected real returns. So that's the point. So first of all, developing countries, they got two things that are making, um, interest rates high. One is they have higher inflation anyway, and the other thing is that even the real, real return is high because that's a risky country, uh, and, um, and, um, if it's risky, it, it returns need to be higher, and the point is that the um. And, and this isn't one of these cases where you see, well, in a developing country they've got higher real returns, let's invest there. Um, you don't, you don't, it's, it doesn't make, it doesn't make these investments seem attractive because they got a higher real return because they deserve to have a higher real return because they, they're, they're riskier. So, uh, so it's not an attractive thing, but both things are going up, uh, the real return and, uh, inflation, so they end up with quite high, uh, nominal rates. you can sort of see that. Uh, you know, you do have some developing countries that are higher than the, uh, sort of the, uh. The linear linear regression shows. Anyway, OK, I think that's OK. OK. But um yes. So let's, let's say more about the International Fisher effect and uh give an intuitive approximation and so on. You OK now? Anyway, so, um, you can see it's very similar to PPP but it uses interest rates to explain exchange rates instead of inflation rates. So PPP states that a currency with a higher inflation will decrease the value and um Fisher F effect says that currencies with a higher inflation. We'll have higher nominal rates, which will uh decrease the value. Anyway, so combining one and two gives us IFE. OK, we, we've got this result, the international, um, um, Fisher Exchange. So let me, let me go to my side. I hope you don't mind. Slide 35. I just want to run through this one more time. So let's just show that this holds one more time, um, from PPP. We have, um, you know, the, uh, the future exchange rate equals the current exchange rate in terms of 1 + YH over 1 + YF. Uh, that's the inflation differential, but these, these things are equal, assuming real rates are equal across countries. And so now we get, uh, this expression here, which is replace our, uh, inflation with uh the interest rate. And the other sort of subtle subtle thing is we don't just write, we write um. You know the dollar over that, uh, with a borrow over that with a dollar. Do you know what you borrow with a bar on top means? Um, Have you seen this in other classes? It's supposed to mean expected value. Do you see that? Is that fairly standard? Nobody's ever written that down. This is supposed to be the expected value of the future spot rate. So, so, you know, and I'm, I'm, I'm not an economist. And these some of these things just seem weird to me, but um you see they don't use expectation for purchasing power parity, but they do use expectation for the international Fisher effect and I can't think of any reason why they should be different, you know, but um, but anyway, um, again, no disrespect to economists, uh, it's probably just a historical thing, but um. But those are the two differences we replace I with R and replace the future actual rate with um the uh the expected value of the future rate. And the surprising thing is that this will rate the forward prices. This expression here is almost exactly you can just put the forward price on the left hand side and you get a forward price. So, that's, that's a nice, that's a nice glitch. OK. So that's, that's all we're saying here. There's just get on with it. This slide, um, you, I think you have a glitch in your slides. I finally corrected it. If you can't see it, all I'm saying is that, um. Um It's just a plug-in Plug-in problem, um, interest rates are 8% in the UK, 6% in the US. There's the current exchange rate. What's the expected exchange rate in one year if the International efficier effect holds? So we got all the numbers. There's the initial exchange rate. There's RH and R R F RH was 6%. The home, so the US is the home country. The foreign country is 8% and uh there's the future expected value of the future um exchange rate. And you can see, um You can see, um, it's lower, you see this. Uh, we're expecting rates to drop. Uh, there's some markets where you expect things to, to increase. I mean, the stock market, you expect it to, to increase, but, um, but there are times currencies can, can go either way, and it's not. And and it's just about these interest rates, what these interest rates are like in, in each country. Or inflation rates. So another one of these graphs, um. I think this one's not too bad. So we've got, um, we've got sort of returns. On the uh on the exchange rate on the vertical axis and we've got the intrinsate differential on the other axis. Did I go through this one? I think I did 337. So why do we, I mean, these should be approximately equal. And um We did a very similar calculation for PPP. And I'll, I'll just remind you, I hope you don't mind, I'll do it one more time. I mean, um, we just take, you know, returns on, uh. On uh the exchange rate. Something might have been and and it depends on Ear there. There's the Fisher effect. When you multiply it through, you get uh that ratio minus 1, which is RH minus RF. We do this over and over again. We've, we've used this a few times. So they should be, they should be approximately equal, and on the next slide we, we talk about these points. The point E, they are equal and there's, there's no problem. It's, it's an equilibrium point. Um, the interest rate differential is, is offset by the expectation, uh, in the, uh, exchange rate appreciation. The expected depreciation in the exchange rate. So and point F is a is a disequilibrium. So at point F, so you're above. So you're above the line. So, um, so you know, expected returns for the currency are 3%. But um the internet differential is 2%. So this is a nice, this is a nice explanation, I think if the foreign currency, see the foreign currency is expected to appreciate by 3%. But the interest rate differential is only is in favour of the home currency by only 2%. So if you invest in the home currency, you get 2% better on the interest rate, but if you invest in the foreign currency, you get 3% better return because the price of the foreign currency will go up. So it's better to invest in the foreign currency. So funds will flow from the home country to the foreign country to take advantage of the higher exchange adjusted rates there. Is that all right? So yeah, economists love graphs like this. I hope that, hope that seems OK. OK, let's see, interest rate parity there we go, now we'll talk about uh forwards. Um, might be a good time for a 5 minute break. Can we take a, is 5 minutes enough to break? Uh, do you need 10? Is 5 all right? Let's stretch our legs. Nobody moves, but you know, it's a good idea to stretch your legs, stand up, and, you know, stretch a bit, and people ask questions during the break often, and that's one of the best parts of my day. OK, 5 minutes, it's about 2:56. OK, thank you.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah You said it's uh s I didn't scare What? Yeah Let The only other I Well, why don't you just take us I Yeah, he's so. No, I don't I mean exactly. I. But Can you listen Yeah. Everyone's already done is He's really got plenty of It's a That's a little Capture the day. A physically bigger field. Mr. bluefin tuna my children. fish. is Jack. Like Fish Island. The fish Councils So That I You yourself. So we going out this weekend Really versus the United States. That What? up Come on. I was That It's right. We've got at least 30 minutes. I'm not getting up 4:30. Yeah, but what if we beat the United States? What if? I. like I'm You know I'm. just At UFC Some genuine OK.

SPEAKER 0
Well, um, Sorry to interrupt, but I, I gave it 10 minutes. Sounded like people needed 10 minutes and um. So, um, I think we can get back into it. Uh, we're making good progress that go faster than. Usual anyway, we'll be fine. And uh next week is kind of a big lecture. It looks like I don't think I have as many extra slides, but um there's a lot going on next week as well. But anyway, um, this is. Interest rate parity, um, this is all about, uh, forwards and futures. This, this is all about forwards. I'm sorry, um, futures are a different thing. I do have a quick slide I know, I don't that I won't, I won't go into. But um A quick definition of um forwards, you know, it's a private agreement to buy or sell a specified amount of a foreign currency at a fixed date rate. At a future date. Allowing the firms to lock in exchange rates and eliminate FX risk. Uh, they're over the counter. They're traded futures are traded on exchanges. Anyway, that's, that's, that's the sort of thing that, uh, that we, we need to know. But, um, but anyway, so that's where we're headed now. Um, anything else? Um, yeah, so, and we get, uh, so this is, this is the stuff that I do most, most of the time. We'll, we'll see an arbitrage argument here. I know you're, I know how much you guys love arbitrage arguments. I can just tell. But, um, anyway, um, uh, and so, uh, so and there's a nice intuition, uh, behind that. Uh, so anyway, uh, you know, another thing that people recommend is that I give people, uh, You know what do you call it? I, um, oh what do you call it when you, uh. Have like a chance to meet one another. You're all sitting miles away from each other, so you can't just turn to the person next to you and say, oh hey, but, um, but if I have time at the end, I might, might do this kind of uh, what do you call it, uh, uh, what do you icebreaker, icebreaker, yeah, yeah, yeah, thank you. If I have time at the end, I'll, I'll might force you to stay a few more minutes and do an icebreaker. Uh, might not work. You'll, you'll be heading for the door. You'll head out the door, but, um, I, I, I do things for high school students sometimes. I do talks for high school students and, uh, I give them icebreaks. So I've also done, uh, I sometimes talk to, um, prospective, um, uh, co op students, you know, and, um, give a little talk to them. I did an icebreaker for them and man, they, they just talked to another. They, they were fascinated to. Be able to talk to one another. So, um, anyway, but, uh, peanuts, that's what the experts. Sort of recommend, you know, a lot of us are just grumpy and don't wanna be bothered by this kind of thing, but, uh, but anyway, uh, I, I might, may have left it too late. But I, I am a bit, I, I think we're OK today, but I, I have been worried about covering the material on time, so, um, we'll see how it goes. Um, For forward prices there can be a premium or a discount and, and here's the, here's the explanation. So suppose the spot rate for euros is $1.10. And the 90 day forward rate is $1.12. So this means the 90 day forward rate means that you can lock in a price for the euro of $1.12 in 90 days. So you can buy or sell euros for $1.12 in 90 days from now. That's locked in. And in this case, the current price is lower than the forward price or the expected future price if you like, and that's called a premium, that's called a former premium. And um while the rate of 1.08 would be a forward discount, so the current price is high and the future price is low, so premium discount, premium and discount, pretty handy terms and pretty intuitive ideas. Um, OK. Interest rate parity. I, I don't think I'm, I'm gonna read this. Let me go. There we go, OK, infinite parity ties the spot rate with the forward rate. For example, here's another just a numerical example. If the spot rate is 108.73 and the forward rate is 1109, then that means in three months you can buy €1 for $1.09. Sort of, OK, OK, so, um, the main thing is to really to understand it we need to go through this triangle and so this I've done on my other, uh. Comments here slide 44, that's where we are, right? Yeah. So I can't read these things and so I've retyped it. Um You know, it, it's all there. It really is all there, but anyway, I just find it a little bit easier to, uh, to, uh, type things out in my own way. Um, what we're gonna do at date zero. Is, uh, invest a million dollars for 3 months and 3 months will be date T. 3 months is just, uh, the maturity of the sort of future contract, the forward contract. OK, uh, full disclosure, I will say future instead of forward half the time. Yesterday, uh, in, in the first lecture I was talking about Brazilian reals and I called them, kept calling them British reals. Uh, so anyway, These are forwards. If I get it wrong, just, you know, just go ahead and add it to my, uh, uh, evaluations, I suppose. I will say forwards. Uh, there's some markets, a lot of markets, they're, they're virtually the same, but, um. Anyway, these are forwards. So the forward, OK, the spot rate is $0.74 it's euros per US dollar. So look at this, the euro is the home currency. That's so so that sort of surprised me. This is the example, of course, this is not, these are not my numbers. This is, uh, this example. So for whatever reason, the euro is a home currency this time, maybe it just was a little bit easier to explain this way. And um because, because what you're doing, you're paying €0.74 every time you buy a US dollar. So, so we have the euros and we're buying US dollars, so we are uh uh the home currency is the euros. Um, the, the three month forward rate was a little bit lower than that, 0.73637. It's very, it has to be very precise, uh, to get the answer we want. So that's the price of US dollars in terms of, of €1 of the euros, and we have the two interest rates in the US, so this is the home interest rate, it's 8% per year, but it's just, it's just a 3 month um investment. So, um, so it's, uh, it's a quarter of a year, so it's 2% for 3 month period. And the European interest rate is 6%, which is 1.5% every three month period. And from the slide, I'll go back to the slide if you don't mind, the thing in the middle they call the alternative investment. That is just invest a million dollars in New York for 90 days at 2%. OK, so the investment is a million dollars at the domestic rate, or sorry, no, it's not though. This is the foreign rate. US is the foreign, the foreign rate. Uh, Invest it for $30 and it's, you get 2%, so you get $1.02 million. So that's the simple one. OK. So now going around the triangle is sort of the messy one. What we do is we take that, so we convert the alternative. So that's one choice. We can just invest at 2%. The other alternative is we can take that million, um, convert it to euro. Uh, so we buy, first step one, buy euros. Um, but, um, and, and in this case we multiply by e zero. Each of those dollars costs, can you see on the previous slide, each of those dollars costs €10.74. So you end up with €740,000 at date zero, is that OK? Then we invest it in Europe. We have euros, so we'll invest it in Europe, and the European rate is uh 1.5% per three month period. So the future value of that becomes this messy calculation. So it's, it's slightly messy, $7,751,100. And then we can convert this to US dollars at the forward rate. So uh now we're um. The forward rate we have to divide by the forward rate, so previously we multiplied by the forward rate. So to go in the other direction we have to divide by previously we multiplied by the exchange rate going in the other direction we have to divide by the exchange rate. So this is all, this is all euros on top and we divide by this is €0.73637 per dollar. That gives a dollar amount of a $1.02 million plus $4. Is that OK? Almost exactly the same. Exact almost exactly the same uh strategies. So this little procedure showed us, let's summarise what we did. On the one hand, the bottom one is the easy one. That's the alternative calculation. You just invest from the previous slide, just invest a million dollars at the 2% at the US rate and you get 1.02%. And in this slide, what did we, we started with, uh, I'll start to maybe I'll delete some stuff now if you don't mind. So we started with a million, converted it to, uh, euros, found future value, and then we converted it back to dollars. And we got the same thing. So, um, so these are equal. These are equal strategies. They give you the same thing. So that's, that's the, the deep result here. So in the next slide, if I can, uh, right to go to the next slide, so if we ignore the face value here, we must have, so what do we have? Let me, can I scroll up a bit? So we've got on the top we've got uh the current spot rate. Current spot rate 1 plus the European interest rate divided by F3 and then equals 1 plus R US. And um you wanna solve for the forward price we're we're calculating forward prices. And when you do that, look at what you get, you know, you get the exchange rate and you get. Uh, the European rate on top, uh, the, uh, the US rate on the bottom, but, but Europe was the domestic currency. That was the, can I go back? That's what I highlighted in a minute. Europe, Europe was the home currency. Strangely, in this example, so as I say, it just, I guess it just made the numbers a little bit easier. So replacing that we get. Are you ready for the grand finale? Uh, 1 plus R. Uh, in terms of home currency compounded forward over 1 + R in terms of the interest rate for the foreign currency compounded forward, and that's interest rate parity. It, it gives you the price is the price of the forward. It's the forward price. This gives you forward price. So all the forward prices that are traded all over the world, currency forwards use this, uh, use this type of formula. And it's almost exactly the same as the Fisher effect. The Fisher effect was exactly the same thing except on the left hand side the expected value of the future spot rate and you have the the forward rate. So it makes sense because it seems reasonable. These forward rates should be predicting the future spot rate, so those should be the same numbers. It's kind of it's very pretty, very different arguments, completely different arguments. And the top one, I mean, if, if this doesn't hold. Uh, you have an arbitrage opportunity. OK. Can I go back? So that's what they're doing this for. That's why they're doing this, um, and so they write the no arbitrage condition in this form, but, um. And they're they're trying to see when is there. You know what happens when you have inequalities here, but I, I prefer to do it my way. I'm gonna be sort of, uh, obnoxious about this. So, so anyway, they write the, they write the no arbitrage condition in this case. I, I like to, you know, cross multiply, put 0 on the right hand side. And uh this is much more. This is really fundamental. OK, so. Um, slide 50. Anything else? Uh, let's see. So we do, we have a numerical example here, it's slide 47. Where are we? We got, we have a few interest rates. So now we'll say the US is the domestic rate, Japanese rate is 0.1%. There's the spot rate. If interest rate parity holds, what's the 90 degree, 90 day, 90 degree, 90 day forward rate? So 90 days, uh, 90 out of 360 is a quarter of a year. So we'll take um the spot rate uh 1 plus RH to the home rate is 2.5% and it's um. Uh, it's a quarter of a year, so we divide by 4 there, do the same on the bottom, and we get, uh, a foreign rate. So it goes from, so the um so this is selling at a premium because this is so this is 0.00919 and this is 0.00914 so the. The right one has a 9 where the other one has a 4. Just a calculation, oh yeah. Uh, and if you want, do I do this one? Is that on the slide? No, I didn't, I didn't do that one, but um. These, um, So the forward premium discount, so we write the forward premium, uh, sort of in percentage terms, that's quite common, um, so but and we've seen. And and it's approximately equal to the difference in nominal rates. Can I go back? Do you know why we've seen this? How far back should I go? I'll try this one. Let me, let me go to my slides if you don't mind. So we've got, we've got, um. Let me do it one more time. So yeah, so we want to take returns now, returns from F minus F0. Where do we go? Yes, it's the same as slide 37. Do you remember that? So yeah. And so here we've got, we're using the Uh, that we, you know, we did the same thing for purchasing power parity earlier. This is the Fisher effect. The EB says that this is the Fisher effect, and we've got interest rates here and here. This is identical to the, um, derivation for forwards. It's the same formula for forwards, exact same formula. The only difference is that This number here is an expected value and the other one is a forward forward price. OK. Um, covered interest arbitrage, um. This movement of money, blah, blah, blah. OK, OK. Here's, here's an arbitrage argument. This, this shows that there will be an arbitrage opportunity. And let's And let's, uh, let's see how that works. OK, let me see. Uh, that's where we're going, but first I wanna look at the big picture. I think this is the best time, so, so plug in the numbers on the next slide. But I'm gonna look at the big picture. OK, so, uh, so we were. One more time to, to Drive it home. This is our expression. If this holds, there is no arbitrage argument. If it doesn't hold, there's an arbitrage argument, but for arbitrage problems, and you see this a lot in derivatives, um, you, you book called parity and all sorts of things, you rewrite the equation where you, uh, you get rid of division or minus signs, and, um, so, so I gotta get rid of this denominator here and just write it so everything is. Uh, involves plus or, you know, addition or multiplication. So this is supposed to be equal. OK, this is supposed to be equal. What happens if it's not equal? And so, uh, and so we'll do the inequality in that direction, OK? What happens if, uh, the left side is bigger than the right-hand side? Then we'll do the other example, uh, we can do the other example on your own. OK, let, so I've got a high side and a low side. We take advantage of this opportunity at T equals 0. This is what we do. So you see that, uh, where, where, where are we're gonna start? E0 is on the low side. What do you do? What does buy low sell high say? These are as loaf or pie. F is on the high side, so sell. Dead easy, right? Look how easy finances. Um, so what about interest rates? So we haven't done interest rates yet. Um, Um, so intuitively, suppose, so the, the domestic rate is, is on the low side. If somebody said, hey, interest rates are low, would you say, uh, is that a good market for borrowing or investing? What's your intuition for that? You say interest rates are low. How many people would say, well, it's time to borrow. How many would say it's time to invest? Borrow, yeah, exactly. Thank you. Interested oh, hey man, I'm gonna borrow. Now's a good time to borrow. It's always the time to invest you're getting a lousy return. So R is on the low side, so we borrow. So, so that extends it from Boshaya. Borrow when rates are low and invest when interest rates are high. That finishes the uh argument and so um isn't that great? So this will this will be on the exam for sure. I'm I'm almost sure. But um, but anyway, so this is just an extension of buy low sell high. And you can do, you should be able to do. Um, the other case on your own, so you can see that case you can see, oh, and the other thing I wanted to make two, maybe two more things, so 2 more things. If you're not just comparing um the interest rates. You're not just saying this interest rate is lower than that interest rate. That's not the point. It's possible you can have this inequality, but RF is lower than RH in that expression, you know what I mean? It, it's not what the numbers say, it's what the overall equation says, you know what I mean? You have to be, you know, on the left side of the equation, or, or the right side of the equation. It's not about comparing, uh, the two numbers 11 by one. That doesn't work. Another thing I wanna say, um, see, um, I, I thought I would say it now, maybe I should have said this earlier, but, uh, OK, OK. So yeah, what happens when you start to do these things when you buy, when you buy the exchange rate, this number goes up. When you sell this one, that number goes down. What happens when uh you start borrowing too much? Supposing the home market, you got a lot of people demanding uh that you borrow. This one I, I, I hadn't thought about, I hadn't thought about before, but, but now is the time. Do you have intuition about that? If there's a lot of demand for borrowing. Uh, do you think interest rates will go up or down? Anybody wanna, anybody wanna guess? I, I don't, yeah. Up, yeah, well done. Did you get that from a course you're just smart? Oh, real life, real life. Oh well Real life, damn, I forgot about that. Yeah, that's cool. Yeah, but, uh, yes, uh, what am I saying? So if, so think countrywide, you know, everybody's asking, everybody was asking to borrow money, and, um, my way of thinking is for an individual bank, um, they want sort of the, the number of people borrowing, number of loans to be equal to the number, the amount of money being invested in the bank, you know what I mean. If they're gonna, if everybody's borrowing money and not enough people are investing, putting, putting money in the bank, then you don't have money to, to do the lending, you know what I mean? So you have to have, so, so the borrowing and lending should be roughly equal, don't have to be exactly equal, I don't think, uh, different firms can have different preferences. I'm sure they've got some flexibility, but roughly speaking, um, if there's too much borrowing, you, uh, you know, you, you. Compared to lending, you want to equalise things too much borrowing, so you want the amount of borrowing to go down, and the way to make borrowing go down is to increase the interest rate. Yeah, if you increase the interest rate, um, fewer people will borrow. They'll be discouraged from borrowing a bit, and, uh, more people will start putting money in the bank, and that, and that will move things. So if you start, if you have a lot of borrowing. In the domestic side that makes That makes rates go up. And um You start to invest in the in the foreign market, so if everybody's investing, investing, investing, you, you want more, uh, you want more people borrowing. You make money from borrowing really. That's because of the sort of the sort of a bit banks make money on mortgages. They don't make money by paying your, uh, interest. So, um, so, so what am I saying? So there are too many people investing, not enough borrowing, so you wanna lower interest rates to get, uh, fewer people investing and more people, uh, borrowing. So it does work, uh, you know, the right side goes up for two reasons, the downside goes down for these two different reasons, and, um. And uh things get back to the new arbitrage case very quickly. OK. OK. So now we'll go through the numbers to, that took, so I thought I was doing great, but I'm slowing down a bit. So we have all these, these interactions, these transactions here, and um let me, uh, let me go through the numbers. So here, um, the home rate is 7%, exchange rate is 1.95%, there's the foreign rate, and, um, there's the forward rate, uh, 1.87%. So it's US dollars per British pound. So US US dollars is the domestic currency and we're buying or selling British pounds. OK, so, so when I go through these things, I like to start where you borrow. I just find it easier to say where you borrow. And um so where did we borrow? We got this inequality, um, so we're borrowing in the domestic. In the domestic currency. So, so, so the idea is that, you know, you borrow money and then you, then you act, and then you, then things get set in motion. So you borrow a million dollars at 7%, later you owe the bank $1.07 million. Getting a bit messy. OK. So that's the first line and then once you've borrowed that million, you use that to buy pounds and you, so the price, uh, you know, uh, the price of each pound is like buying cokes. The price per Coke is 1.95, so you can buy this many pounds. So that's a messy one and, um, so, so in each stage here I've got the calculations at the bottom if you wanna look, uh, a million divided by 1.95 is the next number on the, on the table. And um so we invest the pounds at the foreign rate which is 12%, so we are investing. This rate is high, so we're investing in the foreign market. Yeah, yeah, and we're buying, we're buying pounds because that number was low. OK, so we invest in the foreign market, then we receive the future value at this date compounded 1.2%, and that's the next number we calculated here. That's the future value. And now we use, we have to sell this forwards, forwards, and that's a very complicated number, you see, we had to calculate this number and it has to be equal to this future value on the right hand side, so we had to have this number in mind. Uh, to, to, uh, to make this work. And um so I better delete a lot of stuff. So, so as I say, that was, that was the tricky calculation and um and so uh so there's no cash flow here but at this date we can um we have this, we have these forwards here and we're allowed to sell them. We're selling forwards, so we're allowed to sell them at this locked in forward rate. And that calculation gives So, so we multiply that's the calculation down here, we multiply by 1.87 to get that calculation and so the net cash flow, the net cash flows are there's no net cash flow at date zero. You borrowed, you, you, you moved it into euros and invested, and there's no cash flow, initial cash flow from the forward contract. And on the right hand side there is two cash flows, um, you receive this amount and pay that smaller amount, so you make $4000.51. Is that right? So there's our, there's our arbitrage opportunity, a messier version of, uh, buy low sell high. So I can't imagine something this messy being on an assessment, but, um, you know, you have to understand that the transactions. Is that OK? And um and got the opposite, what happens in the opposite direction. And um and in terms of the numbers they're all the same except um the only the only difference is we have a lower. Uh, forward, forward price, so here it was 1.87 and here it's 1.85 and it turns out you get the opposite, uh, inequality. And you can go through them if you want to. You're, you're buying, you're buying the forward, that's the first one, you're borrowing in the foreign currency. And, and you can, you can go through the details if you want to, but the, the only two, all the numbers were the same except for the ones in yellow, and it's because of, uh, this, uh, different, um, forward rate here. Um, anything else you wanna say? The, the other thing, this is sort of a tedious comment, but really when you're, you're doing a, when you're Doing this kind of a transaction, you, you would want this number to be easy. You would want the forward contracts to be a nice round number. Because it's hard to, uh, you know, for futures especially it's hard to get some complicated number of forwards, but we won't go into that. OK, great. OK, let's see. Oops OK, so, um, OK. So market pressures. So when one currency is in higher demand, this, this in the spot market and sold forward, this will lead to an increase in the spot price. This is basically the, uh, the influence that we were looking at on the previous slide. Uh, an inflow of funds tends to lower interest rates, so, um, That's, that's, so what we did was people borrowing, uh, that's more like taking out funds, but going in another direction if a lot of people are, are bringing funds into the country, um, that's too many, uh, investors. Interest rates must be too high, so you have to lower interest rates to, uh, get fewer investors and more borrowers. Is that OK? Anyway, Uh, here's another, uh, graph. Let's see. This is slide 53. Do I need any comments about that? I think I'm good. Um So G represents a disequilibrium. So what do we have again? Um, oh, I know I do have a, a slide about this. Yes, OK, I found this one a little bit confusing. The vertical axis is interstate differential in home in favour of home country. Inter interstate differential is, is that number right there. That's the vertical axis. And the horizontal axis is the forward premium. Which is, uh, which is this number. So, um, so they made the, uh, axis sort of more complicated than they needed to be. Is that OK? So the vertical one is just RH minus RF and the other one is this looks like sort of a return on the. On the uh currency currency price, anything else? Uh, so at point G. G is below the curve. The, uh, let's see, so the, the interest rate differential is 2%. The vertical axis is at +2. The other one is at +3. And so, uh, and so, um, this is, this is bigger than that and so basically, um. After some algebra, do you wanna do that? I suppose so. I'm not sure this is necessary, but so I, I wrote it in terms of the, uh, forward price because I guess I like working with the forward prices and so what's the intuition here, but you, you know, the if you could buy low and sell high now, you see that, um, you're buying the currency. Selling the forward And um So that the exchange rate risk is covered and with the numbers given in the slide. Um, the numbers given a slide, you will make 1% extra annually. Is that OK? So, um, So if you the differential in the The differential in the interest rates is 2%. But the differential in the um in terms of the forward rates is 3% so you'd rather invest in the in the um. Invest in this then in that, and you can make 1% by doing that. So that means um that means doing this transaction, um. Buy the foreign currency and sell the forward. You make money by, by, by taking advantage of this, buy the foreign currency and sell forward, and the amount of money you make will be um 3%. And uh the amount of money you would have made from the other strategy would only be 2%. I hope that makes sense. And for each. Sorry. Oops. OK, so, for H, uh, point H, can we do that? We're below the curve, no H is above the curve. Sorry about that. Inches above the curve So that means um. That it goes in the opposite direction. Can I go back? So this was below the curve. Yeah So, so the horizontal number was bigger than the, the vertical number. And um and here it's the opposite, so we get this expression and And the The trades go in the opposite direction, so you sell the foreign currency and buy the forward and you'll make um um. In this case, you only make 3% from that transaction, you make 4% just from uh the interest rate differentials. OK. OK, oh that's all right. OK, so that's the last of the sort of mathematical type of stuff, and now we've got just a general discussion that's fairly light, believe it or not, I think. Um, about, um, empirical evidence and, and things like that. So, um, first of all we've got deviations from covered interest rate parity used to be very small before the great financial crisis. And during the crisis, there, there were huge deviations and, uh, and look what happened. OK, so, so there are no deviations, there's a 0, there's 0, I didn't quite get it there. 0 is there. If, if you had to just add a line at 0, there would be no deviations from um interest rate parity. And uh you can see in, in these, these uh red lines are sort of the beginning of the uh global financial crisis. So thanks. So you have a lot of things happening and and then it went on for uh for a year or so. And um but the thing is that um so it was just sort of to be expected, but um. They some of them exist after the crisis. And uh you know, you still get, so that's in Swiss francs. We have 6 different countries here. Japanese yen definitely more deviations than there used to be. Um, pretty much in each case, I think. Um, so the new regulation prevents arbitrage. This is the comments at the bottom here. Prevents arbitrage from taking place, especially at the end of the quarter when banks disclose their capital requirements. So I mentioned this a little earlier. The, the new bank regulations to make sure banks don't default to keep them healthy. If they do. Uh, you know, um, transactions like this, they have to keep money, uh, in a sort of a safe place. They have to, uh, you know, keep liquid assets in a safe place so that they don't, um, get into any sort of, uh, financial trouble. And so what that means is because, because they have to hold all those assets they're less willing to to do these kinds of arbitrage trades because they can't make money from the uh the assets they're uh keeping safe. So, um So, you know, anyway, it surprises me, uh, you know, trying to fix the banking system and we end up with these kind of weird, uh, arbitrage opportunities. So anyway, there may be an opportunity for people like you to go out and, uh, fill the void there and, uh, watch for these arbitrage opportunities. Not sure. But uh, so things have changed. Unbiased forward rates. Relationship between forward rate and future spot rates. So the question is, so we have the, uh, the International Fisher effect which looks exactly the same as, uh, interest rate parity which is the gives the, uh, forward price. And um so, so these should be equal. The the expected value of the future spot rate should be equal to the the uh forward forward rate exchange price. And it doesn't seem to be the case. They're, they're not. If this were equal, the, the foreign prices would be unbiased and that doesn't happen. There's a risk premium. And it can be positive or negative. So, um So this is another one of these. This one really. Uh, really bugged me. I think there's sort of a typo here, but um. It uh Um, the relationship between the forward rates and future spot rate. So if, if they were equal you'd be on the line so there's the uh there's the sort of the um. Um, the, uh, forward rate premium. And there's the uh sort of expected um return on the exchange rate. They, they, they're supposed to be equal. I mean, if, if F1 is equal to the expected value of the future spot rate. And I think what they're saying here, so, so if you're, if you're at this point because there's, uh, the equilibrium is satisfied and nothing happens, but I think for E1, I think they're saying suppose, suppose you're over here, let me do that again, suppose, suppose you're at this point. I think that's what they're trying to say, but I think that's the starting point for E1. The value of the pound is expected to depreciate. Or maybe it's, you know, or maybe. Uh, maybe, maybe they're here. Yeah, the value of the pound is expected to depreciate. Uh, it's this number is 0, and so what that means is the value of the pound is expected to depreciate and you're moving in this direction. Um, Pound holders sell pounds for forwards. Dollar holders delay converting dollars to pounds. If one decreases over time by 4%. No, that's, no, I had it right the first time. Um, so, so if you're here. starting here. Pound holders sell pounds forward. And so, um The value of the pound is expected to depreciate by 4%. Yeah, that's the starting point, and if that happens, then, then people must, uh, expect, uh, the, uh, the floor price to decrease by 4% as well. So people will, if people are predicting that prices will go down, they shorten the forward and that'll move it down in that direction so that's all they're saying there sorry about that. OK. Um, so now we just have discussions about court forecasting and, uh, sort of general discussions like that. Uh, I've got the right time, right? People are leaving early. Oh man. Hurts my feelings, um, not really, not too seriously, as I say, I just think, oh, you know, their daughter is sick or something, uh. Don't worry about it. Yeah, so anyway, um, let's, let's dive into it. We're, we're very close to wrapping things up. Um, requirements for successful currency forecasting. So I mean I think this is part of the, the, you know, the ILA, uh, the ILA work. You have some simple examples of forecasting. One, you could use, you could have exclusive use of a superior forecasting model. That's not going to be sustainable because imitators will enter the market. You're, you're gonna have consistent early access to information that's not gonna be sustainable with instant information. There's a lot of competition for information. You're can exploit small temporary deviations from equilibrium. Those deviations don't last long. Maybe you can predict government intervention intervention in a 4X4X market, long run viability, um, if it's not necessary to outguess the market to win. Anyway, that's, that's not gonna be viable either. Um, market forecasts, you can use forward rates to predict the future spot rate. Um, it's a natural thing to do. You might, you might, you don't have to just take the forward rate. Maybe you'll do some, uh, have some function of the forward rate to predict the spot rate. May serve as an unbiased estimator. Um, you can't, um, do it for longer than one year though, because forward contracts are usually only about a maximum of one year to maturity. You can use interest rates as well. All they're saying here is just, just use interest rates to calculate. Uh, the forward rate. And so those are two kind of equivalent things to do and if you, if you use rates to cal calculate them, then you can go right up to 5 year, uh, 5 year forecasts. Um Anything else? Oh yeah, yeah, this one I really I'm just gonna skip this one. I can't see this coming onto an assessment. Um there aren't that many fixed rate systems uh left now, but, um, but this was a big issue in um late 90s. Thailand had a crisis, they had a fixed rate system and, uh, and they had a crisis and it's spread throughout Asia. There was an Asian financial crisis in the late 90s. So this is kind of interesting for historical reasons, but um. But anyway, I, I would like to turn the page. Um, and then, and then there's another issue, model-based forecasts based on models, fundamental analysis and technical analysis. These are common, um. These are common distinctions. You do this in, uh, in for stock valuation as well. So fundamental analysis, when you're in stock valuation, you really look at the, look at the value of the firm really carefully. You get all kinds of accounting data, figure out what the value of the firm should be, and so you do the same thing. It's called a fundamental analysis. You can look at, uh, macroeconomic variables, inflation, interest rates, national income, changes in money supplies, and so the simplest thing would be to use purchasing power parity. And um it gives an example you know you can use purchasing power parity to find um the future uh spot rate. But there's also technical analysis, um, that focuses exclusively on past prices and volume movements, ignores economic and political factors. Success depends on discovering price patterns. Have you heard about technical analysis in your courses? Uh, it's sort of, uh, it's popularity, you know, varies from time to time, but, uh, some people use like charting, using bar charts, and so on. Some people use mathematical computations and trend analysis, um, but that's just looking at, just looking for, you know, sort of secrets in the, the, uh, price changes and, uh, and nothing, nothing more. Model evaluation and we're done last slide. I don't have too much to say about this, but. Um, to profitably forecast exchange rates, well, yeah, that's true, it's inefficient. It's. It contradicts the efficient market hypothesis. We shouldn't be able to forecast exchange rates, uh, consistently according to the efficient efficient markets hypothesis. Um, they fluctuate randomly. So exchange rate movements should be unpredictable. But um, but anyway, but we, but of course we carry on. There's a difference between accuracy and correctness accuracy is. Deviations between actual and forecasted rates. Correctness is whether the forecast predicts the right direction in exchange rate, even so an accurate forecast may not be correct. And uh and vice versa. A correct forecast may not be very accurate. It's a nice sort of definition, but so the basic decision rule, why do we want to do forecasting. If If we look at, we want to look at how the forecast compares to the forward rate. And if the if the For rate is higher. Than the um In the forecast, then you sell the ford you believe so. When we do forecasting, we're very confident in our E1. That's where, that's what we put our money in to figure out what E1 is. So if this says that F1 is too high, you sell the forward. And if, so in this case, F1 is too high, you sell the Ford, in this case F1 is too low, so you buy the Ford. And that's, and that's it. You can calculate the percent uh profit. You can calculate this last thing if you want to. So as I say, uh, we're putting money to learn that number and see how it compares to the forward. And that's it for today, uh, 350. That was, that was work. I hope it was all right, but, um, uh, anyway, I prefer the arbitrage stuff, but, uh, I'm not the lecturer in charge. So, um, so uh, so you've seen the tutorial question, you'll see the tutorial questions, and, uh, let me know if you have any questions. Have a good week, and, um, oh, do you want, do you have time? Do you want an icebreaker? Oh, do you wanna do an icebreaker? or do you wanna get out of here? My idea, this is very silly, but, uh, OK, OK, you can do whatever you want to, but I would say find somebody you haven't talked to yet. Say your name and say, uh, do you like, uh, I'm my wife, it's very trivial. The high school students thought it was fine. Do you like cats or dogs or neither or both, or, um, or, uh, I don't care, or you're allergic, and, uh, that's the, that's the icebreaker. 2 minutes if you can do that before we go, please just find somebody you haven't talked to. You Have a good week.

SPEAKER 1
I So. Yes. Kingsley, Troy, nice to meet you. OK. What I Maybe I'll bring my pet the dog next week. across Bye Oh yeah, um, it's funny you approved my, um, course matches in exchange, yeah, I remember your comments. Thank you.

SPEAKER 0
Am I gonna regret that? So I'm glad, yeah, that is, that's one of my task. Have a good week. Please. OK. Oh Have a good week.

SPEAKER 2
Oh, I have a question. When we did decide to, should we start it again. Averaged. Which currency should we start? Which currency?

SPEAKER 0
Oh yeah, uh, um, you sort, you sort of do everything simultaneously if you possible. There's no, you, you, uh, you know, uh, the, there are certain things you do on day one and you just do them all kind of at the same time. It doesn't, but I like to, what I, what makes more sense to me is do the borrowing first. And then, and then you have to wherever, wherever you borrow, you borrow, and then you have that money to, to do all the other transactions so it does, it sort of starts with where you borrow, OK, yeah, even

SPEAKER 2
for the last lecture.

SPEAKER 0
Um, I forget, um. What do we do Where do we move? Can you remind me? Yeah, I can't show you I can get. This is um. It was um oh jeez. Yeah, Why did we start, yeah, yeah, why did we

SPEAKER 2
start with the daughters?

SPEAKER 0
Oh yeah, um.

SPEAKER 1
This was Uh, the step one was borrow, uh, that is. That's from today's.

SPEAKER 0
I, I, I don't remember what we did last week,

SPEAKER 2
but this was the last. This is last week, yeah, chapter 60 really? Yeah, we started from slide 22.

SPEAKER 0
Oh, the been asked qua. Oh yeah, absolutely, the bit.

SPEAKER 2
And they gave me the simple one and they gave me. That's a best. I'm confused which one should I start with which kind.

SPEAKER 0
Um, I, I do Mm You could actually go in either direction. That's a point. I mean, um, when you, when you. Oh, there. Oh yeah Oh yeah, no, there was nothing too special, you see. I said, uh, let's start by selling.

SPEAKER 1
Just to see if we can I I think it could have gone, And when you were so, so.

SPEAKER 0
Thank you. Can I address the.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, and this gets really good. currency.

SPEAKER 0
And, uh, it just, it just keeps going around.

SPEAKER 1
So Yeah And so if uh then uh if they

SPEAKER 0
want it goes up. Make it easier to work.

SPEAKER 1
Let me tell you just just so that.

SPEAKER 0
OK. I'm not sure. Sorry.

SPEAKER 2
That To be honest.

SPEAKER 0
OK.

SPEAKER 1
Um I didn't say anything, trust me.

SPEAKER 0
You have to. um the currency rate is uh is What else Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, we could have gone, yeah, we actually could have gone the other way. Mm But, um, We, yeah, we decided to work with

SPEAKER 1
uh. Yeah, we.
