SPEAKER 0
OK. Um, So let's start. Welcome to week 5. And I want to first of all brief you about what we've done in the last 4 weeks because from now on we are going to have a different, if you like focus in this course and I think it's always good to start with a sort of big picture where we started initially in the first lecture if you remember. On multinational corporations, why the world has changed and why suddenly national companies became multinational companies around the world. So that was chapter one. And then from there we basically studied more relationships which exist in international finance. In other words, what factors could determine prices, inflation. The value of a currency exchange rate, what defines the interest rate, what defines and determines and influences forward rate. And then as part of that we went through foreign exchange market chapter 4 dealing with various relationships including purchasing power parity, interest rate parity, etc. Fisher effect, international Fish effect, and you've gone through a number of these if you like, relationships between say inflation versus exchange rate, exchange rate versus interest rate. And so then the last lecture was more on hedging, if you like yourself against risk. For instance, you can apply options, you can apply futures, and you also learn about interest and currency swaps, how to minimise your risk in a world which is full of uncertainty. Now this, and indeed the midterm exam in effect covers these very 4. If you like, this very 4. Um, Uh, chapters. And so what we're going to do is we're going to now focus on How to apply, if you like, the concept of risk. The concept of forces which are influencing risk such as inflation, exchange rate, currency values to the way multinational corporations operate, that's really the purpose of today's lecture. And from now on until week 9 and 10, we're going to apply the 1st 4 weeks materials that we have covered in a practical way. And so you need to understand and differentiate between the first part of the course and the second part of the course. In the midst of all that, I also want to cover today the international monetary system where for instance we know US euro currency, certain other currencies from Chinese currency, Swiss franc. Pound sterling. There are major currencies which are influencing, if you like, transactions, trade, flow of capital, and I think you need to have a general understanding of the international monetary system, but I will leave that as the last part of my lecture today. But I'll focus on what we call a transaction and economic or operating exposures of multinational corporations. And the reason why we're doing that is we are saying to students, you've learned the first part of the course, some of the techniques that you needed to know. From now on we're going to say, OK, if you know about exchange rate and you know about real exchange rate, for instance, how does a real change in exchange rate could influence the Revenue and competitiveness of multinational companies which are operating in different parts of the world. In other words, what will happen if an American company is operating in India, the exchange rate of India rupee changes, devalues. What's the opportunity and cost of devaluation of the currency of the country in which you are operating? That country is called host country. You're hosting foreign companies, and the foreign companies in India are referred to as source countries. The same thing applies to China. China is hosting China is hosting many companies, but then many companies are sourcing, if you like, the source country where they bring their capital to China. And so that's how basically foreign direct investment and operational companies function and in the context of chapters 9 and 10 that I'm covering. You need to understand that the idea is here related to Multinational companies operating in other countries, in other words, in the host countries. So any change in exchange rates, sometimes we refer to in this context, most of the time it is related to the way the host country's exchange rate changes, real exchange rate, not nominal exchange rate changes. And then as a consequence of that, multinational companies which are saying China, in Europe, they will be influenced by the change in exchange rate. And in the case of China, I'll come back to that later on. The exchange rate is fixed. That's why I'm not going into that in detail right now as opposed to other currencies where the exchange rate is flexible and it changes virtually overnight all the time. OK, so basically there are 3, if you like, exposures that multinational companies are having every day, every virtually hour, maybe not every hour, but we are covering basically 2 of them for this course. One is translation exposure, which is not necessarily daily. But is consolidated liabilities and assets of companies when a multinational company like Toyota is operating in more than 40 countries. So how do you deal with your balance sheet at the end of the financial year or depending on how you look at, if you like, the revised version of your balance sheet. So we are not covering that, but we're covering transaction exposure and economic exposure. So for your information. So, um, Let me in this context simply define translation exposure, which is not examinable, but I want to make sure that you are exposed to it and in some accounting courses you may have already done, if you like this particular. Subject if you like, so generally MNCs in the balance sheet and income statement must be translated so the cash flow denominations align with home country's denomination and can be consolidated with parents' financial statements. So assets liabilities translated at the current exchange rate are considered exposed. Changes in currency values lead to foreign exchange translation gains or losses. So in other words, you want to consolidate your balance sheet, you pick up a particular date. If the exchange rate is not in favour of you, say, as a Japanese company. Which are holding Japanese hands and Toyota is an example, then that could in itself influence if you like the balance sheet, the asset liabilities, and your exposure to say, other currencies like Euro currency, US dollar, pound, etc. etc. So that's one of the issues that we look at basically and of course the As a consequence of that, you look at the assets and liabilities and the net position of the company as a result of a particular exchange rate when you have undertaken, if you like consolidation of your financial statements. That's the concept. The second one is that we are going to focus today, and I'm not covering the entire chapter 9. You focus on my PowerPoints basically for this particular chapter. We focus narrowly on some of the key issues of transaction exposure and then we move to full discussion of the second issue in Chapter 10 called Economic transaction. Oh sorry, economic exposure. So transaction exposure is the risk of a company's cash flow, and profitability will be adversely affected by fluctuations in foreign exchange rates between the time a financial obligation is incurred and when it is settled, basically. Now what basically in a simple language transaction exposures mean is that multinational corporations have got many contracts. They have got many places to operate. And every day virtually with the global networks they are subject to the fluctuation of the exchange rate of the countries in which the assets are held or the contracts have been made or have to be fulfilled or the source of the supplier from for instance Europe where the exchanges between the euro as an example again and pound the sterling has changed. So virtually on a daily basis, they are exposed to the change in exchange rate for the entire operation. Depending on you're talking about supplier, contracts, export, etc. etc. As an example here, for instance, foreign exchange risk is significant to MNCs, and I have to also qualify before I come to this example. As you will see shortly, we are not talking about nominal exchange rate, but rather the real exchange rate. In other words, an exchange rate which is corrected for inflation differential between the two countries. In other words, the discussion you had about purchasing power parities. That information needs to be taken into account. The distinction between real exchange rate as opposed to nominal exchange rate is important in all the discussions that we are making if you like. So MNCs here, for instance, Dell Markets, and Dell markets and sells its products in over 100 countries, assembly plants in the US, Brazil, China, India, Ireland, Malaysia, Poland, offices and call centres in 72 countries servicing clients that speak different languages. MNCs are exposed to many foreign currencies. And so that is one example, and you will see many other examples I'm going to provide, where suddenly when you are multinational you need to understand fluctuation of exchange rate. You need to understand the relationship and forces which influence the exchange rate every day. And that is where the 1st 4 weeks of this course has been so useful for you to know all the relationships that we established between exchange rate, prices, inflation, interest rate, forward rate versus basically spot rate, etc. So they are the issues that we are looking at here. It says definition of transaction, the extent to which contractually binding transactions that haven't been executed will be affected by currency fluctuations and settlement. That's the crux of the transaction exposure, and this statement will be repeated a few times throughout this lecture. Another, I mean, a couple of more examples of transaction if you like, uh, exposure, you look at IBM as an example. IBM relies on many suppliers, if you like, final, if you like ends, and they're one of the most, if you like, internationalised company. So for instance, IBM relies heavily on international markets for its revenue and Often engages in cross-border transactions amongst its worldwide subsidiaries. When the subsidiaries bill each other or when IBM repatriates foreign denominated earnings, the timing of this currency convergence creates significant transaction risk. Depending on, and often they pick up the phone, the CEO of the IBM, so headquarters of IBM in the US, will call and say, do not send money from Eurozone because the exchange rate of euro against US dollars is not in our favour if you like. So there are some of the issues. If you can postpone sometimes the date of settlement is an important consideration for the business benefit if you like. Motor car, in the case of Ford as an example, for instance, unexpected movements in exchange rates can require the company to pay more in their home currency in US dollars than they had initially planned. So why? Because they have got many suppliers who provide inputs for the construction and build of the motor car. And so if the exchange rate of US versus their own suppliers are not favourable, Ford ends up to be paying more if you like, if the US dollar is not in a good shape. They appreciate it, for instance, in value in that sense. And so some of these issues are part of what we call exposure, transaction exposure, and the same thing tourism industry. A Swiss-based tourism firm that sells vacation packages to US customers priced in US dollar. However, they have suppliers that bill in US dollar but primarily care about the value of their cash flows in Swiss francs. They get US, but what's the exchange rate between Swiss franc and US dollar at the time when this transaction is taking place and executed, if you like? Francs, they are exposed to exchange fluctuation if the US dollar weakens against the franc. So in other words, if suddenly the exchange rate goes down, well, the contract has been signed, but they're going to be executed, but they're going to receive less French Swiss franc for 1 units of US dollars that they already signed the contract, that's a transaction exposure. They are exposed, so they have to cover themselves and that also explains to you why we have got techniques of basically risk management whether it's forward market. Whether it's options, whether sometimes it's interest rate or currency swaps, they are some of the issues that companies, multinational companies should basically apply, if you like, from time to time. Um Anyway, I already said already that transaction exposure already defined as before, which basically contractually binding transactions that haven't been executed will be affected by currency fluctuations at settlement. That settlement comes, you have to basically, you will be affected. You are at the disposal of, if you like, that particular day and the exchange rate that you have in this case. And there are many issues that they deal with. For instance, exchange rate gains or losses on transactions, denominated foreign currency that will settle in the future. Examples accounts receivables, accounts payables, mergers and acquisitions, etc. etc. Mergers and acquisitions is another tricky part. You enter into. Multibillion sometimes transactions, the exchange foreign countries Europe versus US, Eurozone versus the United Kingdom pound sterling. You will see an example. It's devastating if the exchange rate is not in your favour if you like. So that is really the crux of what we call transaction exposure. So this is one example of similar things I already said. You've got a Belgium-based, basically brewing, the largest brewery with a portfolio of more than 200 brands. London-based Saab Miller was the world's second largest brewery. Its brand portfolio included Coors and Miller. So these two companies have a transaction if you like. So ABIN Beef announced the acquisition of Saabbier for $71.4 billion which will translate into €101 billion or $108 billion US dollars. The pound sterling was trading at the rates that you see here 1.41 and 1.51 for US dollars. So that was the initial, that's the contract, that's the exchange rate, that's the size of, if you like the contract, $71.4 billion. But this was in November 11, 2015. So what happens? There have been some changes in the United Kingdom because of Brexit. So Brexit arrived or there's been discussion. A referendum came up. Brexit referendum and uncertainty over the subsequent negotiations caused the pound, the sterling to drop to 1.10 and 1.2 by merger. So the measure date was terrible for basically the if you like British pound in that sense. So you've got here the pound if you like was buying 1.4 in 2015. Now it's buying only €1.1. It was paying 1.5. Now it's paying 1.2. And so then the consequence of that is what we call a transaction exposure, if you like. So you're dealing with euro. In two different dates and US dollars two different dates, and the consequence of that is the size of the exposure is 70.14. The euro exposure basically is 71.4 divided by 1.4410.96, but The transaction gains in euro is 70.14, which is the original transactions, multiply by the difference between exchange rate in 2016, 1.4 versus 1.1 for euro, which is 21.86. And dollar, the transaction gains in dollar is the same original contract, but the change in exchange rate of 1.5 to 1.2 $20.137 billion. So in other words, they haven't done anything wrong. Everything was perfect, but this is part of the business operation where often. Multinational companies have to hedge themselves against that very change. Have you gone and gone and currency options to hedge yourself against euro, euro, and US dollars? If you have done it, you don't have this exposure. At least you cover partially that exposure. And one of the things I want to say to you is, That many of the techniques that you studied in finance courses are developed by multinational companies, not by necessarily academics, and then academics and others have learned from what the multinational companies do, and some of them maybe became academics, some of them maybe shared the information, then it became part of textbooks. So you need to understand they are coming from a practical experience. And of course the academic research also assisting them like options and basically options pricing. Some of these materials have been developed by academics and that in itself is going to assist the business community. So it's a mutual support, but nevertheless I just want to highlight the fact that the role of business community, multinationals in particular when they are exposed to financial risk. Has been very important for financial stability for ensuring market operates as smoothly as possible, so don't underestimate that and I think that's the crux of the Chapter 9 that I only focus for this course. I used to teach in more detail, but I deliberately Reduce that. So that you can focus on the most important issue. I want you to focus and then we move now to chapter 10, which is a full chapter that I'm going to cover about economic exposure, how different dimension of, if you like, um, if you like this process could also influence the uh basically business activities of multinational companies with the economic exposure. I have to highlight the issue of real exchange rate becomes very important, real exchange rate as opposed to nominal exchange rate for some of the transactions which are happening on a day to day basis as we discussed it in basically transaction exposures. So you need to be mindful of that. I refer to the real exchange rate, but basically because I knew I'm going to cover economic exposure as part of that in my earlier remarks this morning. OK. With that in mind, uh, so let me, uh, just go down and then, uh, we come to the chapter 10. OK, excellent. Are you still awake? And how did you find so far this course? You're going to tutoria? Yes. And you're looking at the questions of tutaria. You definitely, I highly encourage you to look at the questions of tutorial and make sure that you're really on top of those questions. And one of the, I know students are very busy with many other assignments, courses, etc. and often we push it back to week 64, week 7, midterm exam. But generally try to catch up hopefully next week from all the materials that you've done so far and get on top of the materials that we covered that this was the 1st 4 weeks. Excellent. I just wanted deliberately to give a bit of break as I move to the next chapter. So basically, as I said earlier on in this lecture, the crux of the matter is to see the impact of the real exchange rate on the actual operation of multinational companies, and that is why what we call economic exposure is also referred to as. Operation operating exposure because when there is a change in exchange rate in India, for instance, The Indian currency has real depreciation, declining value, taking into account the inflation between the US and India. Then American company would think well. The goods from India are cheaper now to the rest of the world. Now this is a good time to, say for instance this is General Motors in India. This is the time for me to increase the capacity of production and increase the car sale to Europe because say the price will be cheaper by 10% because the rupee, the Indian currency, has declined by 10%. And sometimes I just want to tell you at the beginning, the big picture of this chapter, sometimes you get change in exchange rate which is in your favour, but the decline in the exchange rate in India will lead to massive inflation because foreign goods become too cheap for them. And suddenly cost of labour goes up, costs of inputs will go up. Everything else will go up more than say 10% decline in value of the exchange rate. The company would say no, I'm not going to expand the business. That's the crux of the matter here. So multinational companies have to weigh between competitiveness of the currencies of a country in which they are operating, in this case an American company in India. As opposed to internal and sometimes even external inputs that they have to import from overseas as a consequence of the depreciation of Indian currency. And if the total cost plus wages plus the cost of machineries which may have to be imported becomes higher, The change in exchange rate doesn't give any leverage if you like to multinational companies from the US and sometimes indeed it could be detrimental. And so I just want you to see the big picture of both a positive and negative impact of operating or economic exposure of exchange rates, real exchange rate on a multinational company. If you've got this what I've just said to you, you've got the rest of the chapter. You get it I'm I'm going through the materials. So these issues we're talking about real exchange rates and exchange risk, economic consequences of exchange rate changes, identifying economic exposure, managing, operating, or economic exposure if you like. Measuring and managing economic exposure components of economic and time pattern. The time pattern of economic exposure. OK. So, Just to get some basic concepts first again right, based on what you already have done it. Economic exposure refers to how the future cash flows of the firm are affected by currency fluctuations. Basic principle firm value is the present value of all future cash flows. OK, Economic exposure is how sensitive the change in exchange rate, real exchange rate I was telling you about Indian currency. Economic exposure is sensitive. The change in the present value of all cash flows, cash flows will be suddenly an exposure of great competitive currency in India that I'm going to increase my cash flow for the next 4 or 5 years because I'm going to sell more cars. I just deliberately repeated economic exposures are sensitive. The change in the present value of all cash flows is for a given change in the exchange rate. Exchange rate risk results from the fact that change in exchange rate is unknown. Because we don't know obviously the future. And so here if the change in present value as a result of change in exchange rate is different than zero, the firm has economic exposure to exchange rate fluctuations. So that's just the, if you like, framework of economic exposure that you need to appreciate. Operating exposure, the extent to which revenues and costs are affected by currency fluctuations. I gave you the example of India so you can appreciate what I'm saying, whereas transaction exposure, the extent to which contractually binding transactions that haven't been executed, will be affected by currency fluctuations. There are different time patterns of economic exposure. Sometimes it is non-contractual. Invest in new product development, distribution facilities, brand name, marketing, foreign production capacity. supplier relationships, etc. In other words, as a multinational company, you're dealing with many, many suppliers, many, many network of, if you like, producers who are going to assist you if you like with your overall production. Quasi-contractual, for instance, quotation of foreign currency price receive and then contractual ship products bill customers in foreign currency, receive bill for suppliers in foreign currency, collect foreign currency receivables, pay foreign currency liabilities, etc. etc. I deliberately read so that you get the concept that we're dealing with multi-dimensional, if you like, transactions and issues if you like, and that's important. So the real exchange rates and exchange risk. So this is where the issue of real exchange rate comes in. The real exchange rate is the nominal exchange rate. I already told you. Remember the purchasing power. The real exchange rate is the nominal exchange rate adjusted for changes in the relative purchasing power of each currency since a base period. In this example, the real exchange rate, ET is 96% of the nominal exchange rate. So here, the definition of real exchange rate, you need to be very mindful and know it. I already in lecture one PowerPoints. First PowerPoint, I already defined your real exchange rate towards the end of my PowerPoint deliberately to make sure you get the concept right. from now on it's more formalised and you need to be mindful of this definition. So the real exchange rate ET is equal to the actual exchange rate multiplied by inflation of F stands for foreign country. Inflation of hedge home country. Taking into account the inflation of foreign country and home country, then this will be the percentage change of exchange rate will be a real exchange rate changes. Sometimes the real exchange rate might be zero because the inflation in two countries will offset any change in the next exchange rate period. So there is no real exchange rate. The currency may have changed, but the real exchange, it hasn't changed. Example, Danish krone, the currency of Denmark, has devalued by 5%. If Danish and US inflation rates were 3 and 2% respectively, the real exchange rate is computed as, so you've got basically 3% inflation. In Denmark, 2% in the US basically, and the currency has devalued by 5%, so the new spot rate is 95% of the earlier one. And what's the real exchange rate you can see it's 96% of the exchange rate. In other words, 4% if you like, real change in this case. So here we're saying about change exchange rate, real exchange rate minus the spot rate. The real exchange rate is 0.96 of the spot rate minus the spot rate, so the, the real change here is -4%. When E is equal to ET, in other words, the nominal and real exchange rates are the same relative prices are equal and no operating exchange rate risk. So prices could go up, the exchange rate could go down with the same percentage between two currencies and two countries. So in that case, the real exchange rate hasn't changed. In other words, the actual exchange, nominal exchange and real exchanges are identical. In this case, not necessarily the case. So here, a change in real exchanges affects relative price changes, a reduction in the purchasing power of one currency relative to another which will alter real cash flow. That's the crux of the matter. You need to pay attention here basically, and I think you need to be mindful of that. So basically a large change in nominal exchange rate which is completely offset by a large change in price levels does not change the competitive position of either domestic firm or foreign firm, generally speaking. All the foreign like foreign and domestic suppliers and producers, collaborators, they are OK. You've got higher inflation in the Philippines as opposed to the US, as you will see shortly as an example, but the exchange rate between the Philippines and US also accordingly changed, and so the actual net position or profit, everything to an American company is the same. OK, that's fine. I don't have economic exposure. Because the the economic forces, in other words, the market is superbly efficient. But what you know is you've learned in purchasing Power parity chapter 4, purchasing power parity doesn't hold in the short term. They can't have a perfect market tomorrow. You can't have a perfect market. All forces are exactly land according to the textbook predictions. And so that's where the economic exposure and real exchange rate change occurs and therefore exposure to that change as a result of, if you like the way you're operating in different parts of the currency, the countries with different currencies. So I already said that the law one price says purchasing power parity. If PPP holds, there will be a constant real exchange rate between currencies. That's important for you to understand. And I'm taking my time to make sure you understand the concept here because then you've got practical questions and all, you get it very quickly. Foreign subsidiaries of the US MNCs will have cash flows that vary with the foreign country's inflation rate, but the US MNC will have constant real dollar cash flows because exchange rate and inflation are basically working together, offsetting each other's differences if you like, and that's it. In reality, countries with high and unpredictable inflation rates also have unpredictable real exchange rates, and this often, not always happens in emerging countries, developing countries, but also in so-called developed countries. We have, we had real appreciation of the Japanese yen. Many years ago. And for extensive period of time. In Australia we had real appreciation of our currencies for a number of years and some of the motor car producers have left Australia because Australian goods became too expensive to export. They couldn't sell car produce in Australia because, say, as an example, the Australian car became 10% more expensive in Singapore or. Malaysia and Indonesia because the exchange rate to Australia has gone up by more than 10% in value. So what do I do? I can't continue producing as Toyota in Australia. And I come back to that, but I just want to give you an example at the outset so you get the concept right. Excellent, excellent. The next one is basically an example between two currencies. One American company is basically producing a medical device. Basically, and then basically dealing with Philippines in this case the counter if you like countries Philippines, so there is a different inflation rate in the US versus Philippines. The question here is would An American company will be affected as a result of that. So let's look at the example. The Philippines subsidiary of a US-based MNC produces and sells medical imaging devices in the Philippines. OK, so that the local currency here is peso, peso or Philippines. Assume the following. Today a device sells for 100,000 pesos, which is equivalent to $1000 US dollars, and the cost of production is $400 US dollars or 40,000 pesos. That's today's price if you like. The subsidiary's profit margin is basically $60,000 the difference between $100,000 and $40,000 costs, and therefore it translates with the exchange rate of 0.01 if you like peso will buy $0.01,600 US dollars. Now, this is this year, if you like. Price is a constant, but inflation in Philippines goes up by 20%. No change in inflation in the US. So here, let me just show you first on the table to make it clearer. Price beginning of the year Philippines 100 and US 100. End of the year in the Philippines 120, in US it's 100. Beginning of the year, the exchange rate is 1 peso by 0.01. The real exchange rate is the same as the nominal rate, exactly the same beginning of the year. End of the year, the inflation has gone up from 100 to 120% in the Philippines. So what's the consequence of 20% inflation? Basically, what's the consequence of inflation is it changes the. Real exchange rate and have a look here. Next year the expected inflation is 20 in the Philippines and 0 in the US. If PPP holds, let's assume if PP holds, the peso will devalue to what rate to a new rate, which is basically the spot rate multiplied by basically inflation of the foreign versus domestic country, the exchange of equations that you've seen before. Here And so what you get is you get the real value of the peso says is at basically 0 point. You get basically the exchange rate that you see here. But what is the real exchange rate? The real exchange rate is have a look. The new exchange rate as a result of inflation. Basically multiply by the inflation in two countries. Have a look again here. Here is the equations that we use. The new exchange rate multiplied by inflation in two countries, you get the real exchange rate. So what you get is the value of the peso stays at 0.1. Why? Because inflation has gone up by 20%, but the exchange rate, the new exchange rate has gone down by 20% as well. Instead of 0.01, it's 0.0083. So therefore, subsidiary profit margin remains the same. Why? Because have a look here on the bottom of this table. So the beginning of the year we are talking about 100,000 peso, $100 US dollars based on existing currency. The end of the year, the price has gone up by 20%, but the exchange rate has gone down from 0.01 here, or maybe I should here, 0.01 to 0.0083. So you multiply 120,000 by 0.083, it becomes $101,000 US dollars. The same. The price from an American perspective is the same no matter what was the inflation rate in the Philippines due to the fact that Exchange rate adjusted accordingly and similarly the cost will be multiplied 48,000 as opposed to 40,000 at the end of the year. Multiplied by a smaller fraction of the exchange rate you get still 400. US dollars cost. So the net position for an American perspective profit margin was $600 US dollars at the end of the year is also $600. So in that case there is no there is no economic exposure. There is a change There is a change in exchange rate, but the change in exchange rate, if you like, has occurred based on PPP. And the exchange rate, if you like, as a result of that. Is basically if you like assisting the economic exposure.

SPEAKER 1
The, the increase in the inflation rate is offset by

SPEAKER 0
That's exactly right. In other words, the purchasing power parity holds. In effect, and if purchasing power parity holds, the real exchange rate and no new nominal exchange rate is identical. Because there is no, in effect, change. If you like a real change in exchange rate, but the change in exchange rate is due to the purchasing power parity. Absolutely. And so that's basically the crux of the matter, and this is one best scenario for you, but in many cases, The exchange rate doesn't adjust. It doesn't go to here, 0.083, and therefore you have to look at the difference between the new exchange rate that you're facing and consequently the real exchange rate that we are going to look at basically on the examples here provided to you guys. Excellent So With that in mind, I'll just give you another example if you like to show you where the exchange rate doesn't change according to purchasing power parity, and as a result of that there is a real change in exchange rate, and this will be devastating when there is an inflation, say, in a country like Chile, Latin America. foreigners or foreign companies are operating in Chile, but the exchange rate doesn't change accordingly based on PPP. And therefore what's the consequence of now the real change in exchange rate. So this is just opposite to the previous example. So here, 1979, 1982, Chile's inflation and the US the same 1982, 160 in Chile, 130 in the US. Nominal exchange rate one peso wise as you see the figure 0.25205 1982 0.2564, exactly the same. There is no change in exchange rate even if the inflation differentiation between the two countries is massive 130 versus 160. This is opposite to the previous example we've seen that the exchange rate basically adjusted. Here we are. The exchange rate basically adjusted very quickly. So In that case, what is basically the real exchange rate? The real exchange rate in 1982 is still the exchange rate, the new exchange rate in 1982 if you like, multiplied by inflation between two countries, then the exchange rate becomes 0.3156. This is very much bigger than 0.256. And what does that mean? That means the real increase in real exchange rate here is the new, if you like, exchange rate, the real exchange minus the nominal exchange rate, which gives you 23.1%. The new figure versus the old figure, which in that sense is exactly the same as 1979, 1982. This figure hasn't changed and therefore, What you get is you get the difference between these two, which is 23.1%. Real value of Chilean currency which increased. And if the exchange rate of Chilean has increased, in other words, the value has increased, what's the consequence of that on exports if Americans were producing goods they wanted to sell to Europeans from Chile. And the exchange rate has gone up by 23%. Any goods produced in Chile to be sent to the European Union because their big market has increased by 23%. So what is the reaction of the foreign companies operating there? They may have to close down sometimes. Of course, if it continues on, you might wait for a 6, 12 months, but if the forecast is exchanged is not going to adjust according to PPP, I'm going to sell my goods too expensively. Not going to operate and the real exchange rate change in Chile also affects domestic producers. It's not only American or Japanese who are working there, but also the countries themselves. And as I said to you in the case of Australia, it happened to us, I think from our recollection 2010, 2011 we had only one or two Japanese companies left. They basically decided to pack and leave. They too expensive. It wasn't the Australian dollar the only factor, but it was a major factor when they saw the exchange rate is not competitive. So the result is economic devastation, loss of export markets, loss of domestic markets, massive unemployment, numerous bankruptcies, numerous bank failures. So that basically is virtually opposite of what has been said in this context, if you like. Excellent, um, and the equations that you use here, as I said, is already presented in this case. OK, very good. Are you still awake? Yes. OK, good. I have to check, uh, with you. Are you OK? Um, so, So an increase or decline in the real value of the nation's currency affects its competitiveness in both the domestic and foreign markets. Exports Here direction in the real value of the nation's currency. I already said that, but I just want to go through them more competitive relative to foreign goods. Basically declined. Imports less competitive relative to domestic goods. And less exports, less competitive relative to foreign goods because Chilean goods cannot be sold to the European Union. Basically that's the concept if you like. Imports more competitive relative to domestic goods. Many people from Chile, in the case of previous example, they find 23% cheaper to import from, say, the European Union and America. And so they will shift. The goods that were produced already in Chile and substitute them for foreign goods because they are cheaper by 23%. And the imports, in other words, for their case is less competitive relative to domestic goods in the case of if you like direction of the currency depending on the currency whether it's going up or down. So you need to be conscious of the two dimensions of exchange rate and sometimes the exchange rate could go up and sometimes the exchange rate could go down and the consequence of that on both exports and imports. Excellent. And there is one other example. It's already covered the materials, but this is just another example of where when there is a change in currency, what will happen if you like. An international movie business is priced almost exclusively in the US dollar. The studio pre-sells foreign rights to film and finances its production with the revenues. The pre-sale rights for the continental Europe account for one third of the film's budget. In 200, the year 2000, the Wall Street Journal reported that the euro's 21% plunge against the dollar hit American filmmakers. European demand for those rights dropped because they became more expensive in euro terms. This is just a general concept that when the exchange rate basically goes down. And if you like, the prices are not keeping up with the change in exchange rate, you can basically lose your competitiveness. That's just a footnote for you as part of this presentation, but it basically reinforces the power of the exchange rate, if you like. And of course we need to take into account the actual real exchange rate in this context. Which we haven't discussed in the previous example here, but this is just an example to show you the power of exchange rate where suddenly companies like film producers or film suppliers, they could be affected as a result of change in exchange rate. OK. Then we continue on, if you like, our discussion, Economic Council exchange rate. One is that I already covered the transaction exposure of if you like materials that we covered. As part of Chapter 9, and I don't want to go into details of exactly the same issues if you like here, bear with me for a second. Yeah, I think if you don't mind, I just want to show you first one example before I go to the next previous PowerPoints, I want to show you this one first because it builds much nicer here. Um. An example of economic exposure. An American company operating in India. So let's assume that we are talking about the real change in exchange rate between Indian currency and US dollar if you like. And I've already given you an example of India, an American company in India. It's much easier for me now to repeat but consolidate what I've said to you about the economic exposure. An American company doing business in India, Economic exposure and a real depreciation of the Indian rupee create dynamic scenarios for exports and revenue. Just bear, try to appreciate the sequence of events. rupee depreciation, this is real depreciation drives export revenues. Increased competitiveness. A real depreciation of the rupee makes Indian goods and services relatively cheaper on the global market because say it has declined by let's say 10%. The case of Chilean example was 23% appreciation or revaluation if you like. In this case, the depreciation is 10%. If the American company operates a subsidiary in India that manufactures products for overseas markets, that subsidiary's product becomes much more competitive than the rivals in the US or in countries with stronger currencies. Boosted demand and volume because the subsidiaries products are cheaper for foreign buyers. Overseas demand for those exports naturally increases. I already said that, but I deliberately insert some of this text into PowerPoint for your future reference when you prepare yourself for your exam or you look at the tutorial questions. So that's the purpose of that to make sure that PowerPoints are comprehensive. However, there are more into this example. Revenue translation. When the Indian subsidiary sells these goods globally, it earns revenue. When those foreign earnings are converted back into the parent company's home currency, the increased sales volume translates into a larger influx of US dollars because say a company has suddenly increased its sales by say 25%, 10% cheaper Indian cars in America. Maybe in America as well push back to send back to America but Europe or Asian countries, etc. so the consolidated income could be seen if you like the cash flow in US dollars, even if you lost 10% in value, you still feel good as multinational companies, but From the US parents' perspective, we need to also look at the other dimension of these if you like operations. When the rupee depreciate losses value against the US dollar, it introduces a unique challenge in economic exposure. While the operational side, the exports out of India might see a massive boost in revenue, the financial reporting side experiences a drop in value. What does that mean? When the US company consolidates its Indian subsidiary financial statements back into the US, those rupee denominated revenues are worth fewer dollars, which can result in loss on paper, also known as translation exposure. As I said to you, you don't need to worry about it. So I just want to say that one of the things that you need to be, I just wanted to make sure you get the big picture of this process, but what I want to emphasise is when we say there is a depreciation by 10% of Indian currency, therefore you're going to increase your sales by 20% or 25%, my story. Could be challenged. Why? Because if there is a change in depreciation of the currency in India, what's the cost? What's the impact of that on cost on labour? On cost of machineries, on cost of other imports, on cost of supplies from India, where inflation has gone up by 15%, even if the exchange rate has gone down, the real exchange rate has gone down by 10%. So you need to take all these factors we used to teach the students scenario one, scenario two when economic exposure is positive, when economic exposure is negative. But I'm just basically summarising that there are more layers in order to consider for a variety of scenarios the impact of real change in exchange rate of one country which is hosting foreign companies, so you need to bear this one in mind. OK, uh, with that in mind, I just want to come back now to economical operating exposure. So the question here is, Um, Maybe just bear with me for a second, just bear with me for a second. I'll just do one more example just to give you one more example deliberately. Toyota car as a motor. So that if you're watching me basically now or later on in the video, I just want to make sure that I first cover these materials if you like. I might just even reorder a few pages of PowerPoints that I will upload it on the. to make sure that you get more examples before I go and give you more management, if you like, advice as to how to deal with it. So I find it often over the years that examples are always very prominent for students, and I feel that I should do that. So here this is another example where. Japanese yen over decades has appreciated against US dollars. And that is the crux of the matter, basically. And when the Japanese appreciate what's the consequence of Japanese car producers which are operating in Japan. To the rest of the world. If Japanese currency goes up, real exchange rate pressures by 15%. The car produced and exported from Japan to the rest of the world, if you like, is increasing by 15%. And of course there are ways to minimise that increase, but that's the crux of the matter. And so this is again another example opposite to what we gave you the example of Indian case of an American company in India. I just wanted to make sure that I contrast that with another case where the currency has appreciated and the companies in that country themselves are exposed to real change in exchange rate. So here. I tell you, and then I'll read out. The bottom line is Japanese cars, Toyota and other producers might be basically in a bad shape because they can't export as much as they could. Their revenue could fall and as a result of this scenario that their revenues could fall, and it happened in Japan, guess what happened to Japanese car producers. They shifted their production to China. They shifted their production to Latin America. They shifted production to Australia, but then they closed down. They shifted production massively to the United States. Because they said we do not want to sell our car in Japanese yen. We want to sell them in the local currency in which we are operating. And that is wherever I am as Toyota, Europe, Southeast Asia, China, etc. etc. So that's what it, and I can let me just go very quickly. If the yen appreciates, should Toyota keep its price or dollar price constant? By keeping its price constant, the dollar price will rise, resulting in declining sales and market share. To keep its market share constant, it will need to keep the dollar price constant and thus face a lower profit margin. So in other words, one option for when you want, for instance, facing with the exposure of the economic exposure, one way for you is you say I can bring my profit margin by say 10%. If the currency has gone up by 10%, I want to reduce my profit and continue on for a while. That's one exposure. If you like counter reaction to the appreciation of the currency. Either way, it's yen revenue will decline, generally speaking. Toyota can focus on the domestic market, but so will other Japanese firms. So if they want to sell more to the producers to consumers in Japan, the price of Japanese cars, whether it is made by Honda or Toyota or other countries, will decline. That's another. Some production costs will decline as imported inputs become cheaper. If Japanese yen are more expensive against US dollars by say 10%. Foreign goods, foreign inputs coming from outside Japan will come cheaper by 10%, but not every input is from overseas for manufacturing, if you like cars. And so therefore they don't have a definite answer to what's the consequence of that. So on net Toyota's diminished revenue will not be fully offset by diminished costs at the end of the day. So that's just one of the exposure in economic terms, operating costs that you need to be very mindful of that. So you can basically let me just now come back to this if you like. various steps that we should take now as a way of reacting as multinational companies when we are exposed to change in real exchange rate. That's what it is. So there are a number of options available to multinational companies, and we're going to list this is management side of multinational. If you end up working for a multinational companies, you are on the management side. You can't control appreciation of Japanese yen, but you say I can control the production of Japanese cars in Japan. I can do different things. If you are Boeing in America and Boeing is highly differentiated aircraft that many countries want to buy Boeing. And if the American dollar goes up by 30, maybe 15 to 20%, would people switch to Airbus? Maybe, but maybe not. They are happy to pay for that differentiated products. So these are some of the factors that you need to take into account that you can't follow the textbook that I've just covered so far to say with the exception of what I've said about Toyota. That you can just simply follow the textbook and say yes, OK, we should do it this way, but there are different ways that you can deal with economic exposure, so here we go very quickly. One is Pricing flexibility. Do you have price flexibility? If price exchange rate makes your goods more expensive, can you reduce your profit? Price flexibility depends on price elasticity of demand. Change in demand given the change in price. For instance, the price of demand depends largely on product differentiation. As an example, Apple versus Alcoa Corporation, which is an aluminium company of America, one of the world's largest producers of aluminium. aluminium is produced everywhere, many parts of the world. So basically your exchange rate from the US is not very good for your exports and your basically aluminium production cost or price goes up by say 10% against aluminium produced in say China or Southeast Asia or Latin America. Are you able to basically cut back on your profit? The answer is the elasticity of demand here is basically not conducive because if I basically don't either reduce the production, cut back. I can't basically absorb the profit because the price is determined internationally and US dollars are not in my favour. However, if you are Apple, I give you the example of Boeing or sometimes German cars, Mercedes-Benz, for instance. In some instances people want to drive a Mercedes. It is a highly differentiated product. No matter what's the value of the euro against your currency wherever you are, people still could buy Mercedes-Benz. So Apple, highly differentiated can respond to adverse exchange rate changes by increasing the price of its products, thereby preserving its profit margin. Whereas in the case of basically a low, if the dollar increases in real terms, it will be uncompetitive in the foreign and domestic markets, and its profit margin. And you can continue your profit margin to some extent. After that you have to stop producing if the exchange is not in your favour. The other, ah, if you like, um, techniques, um. The other techniques that we are using in management for multinational companies is shifting production. If you are a multinational, you are producing in different parts of the world, are you able to reduce production in one country and increase production in another? And they do that very smart because you're dealing with different currencies. Depends on operating exposure depends on the ability to shift production and the sourcing of inputs among countries to mitigate risk. For instance, what does that mean? shifting production. BMW produces the X3 model in Austria, South Africa, and the US. So BMW is producing in three locations. What will happen if the dollar depreciates against the euro? Which happens all the time, most of the time, put it this way. BMW can increase production in the US and decrease production in Austria. So if US dollar becomes cheaper against the euro and you're producing one factory in Austria which is dealing with euro currency and one of your companies is in America in US dollar, so if the US dollar has gone down as an example again 10%, so your goods are cheaper, 10% when you export it back to Europeans. You don't need to produce it in Austria. And to the rest of the world, of course, and you can export it to Latin America and all other places, so they are the shift in production that is important. You need to take into account if you like. So that's just one example that you need to take into account. The other one here that I've already covered is. Uh Certain management if you like forces that you can exert as a way of countering if you like, either immediate real change in exchange rate or if it happens you can just react and have a better steady if you like reaction with that if you like suddenly. Closing down too fast or bringing the company down or the share value of the company down, so there are some of the issues we need to look at marketing management to exchange risk, production management to exchange risk, planning for exchange rate changes, financial management of risk. So what are the key factors that you take into account? Market selection. There are a number of factors we are looking at. The 3 elements of marketing management. And so if you sometimes who have got only mathematics background, if you like sitting in the class and you say, oh my God, now we're talking about management of multinational companies, I just want to say I think it's good to see the big picture as we've already gone through a lot of mechanical parts of the course with different. Definitions, theories, etc. etc. So here are the soft elements and yet highly strategic elements of multinational companies. When you do a course called international business finance, you need to be aware of them. So that's the purpose of this presentation. Market selection reduces presence and marketing efforts in markets where exchange rate changes make the product uncompetitive, like Toyota, which left Australia when the Australian dollar increased in value. I've already given you the example. So basically that's one, reduce the presence of marketing efforts in markets. Exiting entirely must be evaluated with the cost of reentry and potential loss of a valuable option. I don't know whether Toyota will come back to Australia, and I don't know how many times multinational companies closed down and then went back to other countries, but just basically the crux of this message is market selection is important. Where there is no profitability, just forget about it, close it down, because you are not one producer in one country only. You can compensate that. The other one is pricing strategy. Focus on market share or profit margin. The decision depends on price elasticity of demand, and economics of scale. I already gave you aluminium producer. aluminium producer may not have pricing strategy. There's no way you can do that. Industries with large economies of scale will favour increasing market share. One of these concept industries with economies of scale will favour increasing market share. This needs to be put in the context of what we mean here. What we mean is sometimes the exchange rate might not go basically against you. The exchange rate could go in favour of you, where for instance, Ford and other American producers, when the US dollar declines in value, they realise American cars could be much cheaper in Latin America. They keep exporting a lot to America to Latin American consumers. Once American consumers use taste the American cars, even if the US dollar goes up in value, where motor car producers from America can no longer be competitive in Latin America. Consumers of the existing American cars in Latin America may want to replace their cars with another American cars, no matter even if they have to pay another 10% more for the value of American cars. That's one of the issues that you need to take into account. So that's when you have economies of scale, you push your car to foreign consumers. Let them taste your goods. If you are really good at what you're doing, people follow you even if the price of your goods become a bit more expensive. Product strategy, manage the timing of new product introductions, product line decisions, and product innovation around currency changes. Expand product lines after home currency depreciation as exports of MNC product in the host country could increase. I gave you the similar example I just gave you here in the case of large economies of scale. You can push basically the price and move your car to the rest of the Latin American countries because you're competitive, offer less price sensitive products after an appreciation. Let me comment for first one. The first one, manage timing of new product introductions. This one is a little bit um. It's too good to be true if you know exactly when the Japanese yen will come down, when the American dollar suddenly goes down in value, or the euro will go down in value, and then you line of production becomes like that. But I want to tell you what motor car producers have done when the global financial crisis happened in 2007, they suddenly stopped line of production. They pushed back the production by 2 years. Toyota didn't produce any new cars. Other producers didn't produce any cars. You delay the line of production and take your time rather than rushing to flood the market with new products where either the exchange is not in your favour or the economic conditions are not in your favour. So you need to be mindful. The other one is offer less price sensitive product after an appreciation. This is not good for everyone. You can't offer a differentiated product if you are an aluminium producers, even if you are a multinational American producer, a local. You can't produce unless you process something as aluminium, but other than that, you need to have the ability of differentiation, so you need to be mindful of that. The example here given to you, Volkswagen moved from low price, low maintenance cars to higher priced cars after appreciation of Deutsche Mark in the early 1970s. This is just one example, OK, but I've already given you several examples already. 4 elements of production management. So the other element is how do you manage your production for economic management, if you like for economic exposure. So in this case. Product sourcing is an important input mix, production, production shifting, plant location, and raising productivity. Input product sourcing is an important consideration in responding to currency fluctuations. For example, in the early 1980s, Caterpillar, a US MNC with a focus on construction and mining, responded to a strong dollar by shopping the world for parts. More than 50% of its pistons come from Brazil. So in other words, sometimes the US dollar has gone up in value in the 1980s, significantly, 40% increase in value, unbelievable. I don't know whether I if you go back to my first lecture, I covered that in a beautiful graph which shows the value of the US dollar from the 1970s to 2024. You will see substantial change in the global economy because the US basically increased the value of US dollars. And so many producers in America, they started. Actually getting their inputs done in cheap countries, then asking them to ship back to America and then assemble them together so that if the American dollar went up by 20%. But the cost of input has gone down by 25%. They wouldn't worry. They will still send their final product made in the USA to wherever China, Europe, etc. Production shifting. This is similar to input. In 2014, following the weak yen, Subaru shifted production from its Lafayette, Indiana plant toma, Japan plant. Or Ford in the US increased part of its inputs and production to Mexico due to increasing value of US dollars in the 1980s. Exactly the example I gave you, some of the parts of production, the actual production of American cars shifted to Mexico to be produced with low labour costs of Mexican. But yes, being shipped back to US, made, made in USA. That's another way to do that. You can always have, by the way, shift your car to Mexico and you still use General Motors if you like, even if it's said made in the US in Mexico, but nevertheless, the option is up to them. And different considerations should be taken into account. Plant location it's the same thing. A firm without foreign facilities that is exporting to a competitive market whose currency has devalued may find that sourcing parts abroad is insufficient to maintain unit profitability. This is exactly the issue of the aluminium production in America. If the price of aluminium is down, it's down unless you're going to be in different parts of the world for aluminium where it's more competitive. The other response to the economic and financial risk is increased productivity. Why? Because productivity means you bring the cost down by a certain percentage. If the US dollar goes up by 10% and your productivity also goes up by 10%, it means the cost of production, if you like, the overall cost of production declined by 10%. That's an example. And therefore that is one way to respond to that. Um I think that's basically I don't want to go. OK, I'll very quickly read this one. There's one or two more examples. I'm just mindful. I want to move to the next chapter. Large MNCs provide scenario analysis of the impact of different exchange rates on profits. The problem is if I start talking I have to take my time to do that. So multinational corporations generally speaking, they have got a very competent team of management and their support where they are not watching the exchange rate of today or next month, what's happening in the Middle Eastern price of oil. US dollar might go down again or USAustralian dollar could go up again. They have got a variety of scenarios. And they respond to that depending on which of these scenarios could be a real example. Sometimes none of them could eventuate, but they do have always options available. So that's one of the things that you need to take into account. For 2018, the annual report of Novo Nordisk, the Danish pharmaceutical states that a 5% increase in US dollar with respect to Danish crone would increase its 2019 operating profits by $116 million US dollars. They have a scenario if the US dollar goes down, therefore our competitiveness basically could improve if you like in this case. And therefore we've got here prudent MNC preparing. So that's already said that financial management, the other strategic marketing, production adjustment takes time to implement. Financial management ensures that while strategic adjustments are affected, any reduction in earnings or assets is matched by a corresponding decrease in cost of servicing the liabilities that fund those assets. Of course this is the fundamentals of finance. If you can find production. Suppliers, customers in such a way that your assets and liabilities, exposure to real change in exchange rate of asset side or if you like revenue side, and the costs can offset each other, you are absolutely a winner in the market. You are navigating an uncertain global financial market and geopolitics of the world, be absolutely perfect. There are some who might be doing it, but not always. It's possible. In practise, it's not often happens, basically the case. OK, that basically is the end of the two chapters that I have covered, Chapter 9 and Chapter 10. So what I would like to do for the remaining time. Uh, if you don't mind, are there any questions, by the way, on what I've said? OK. How was it? Clear, alright, informative? You, they challenged you or it's all right. Just check what do you think? OK. All right, that's good. I mean, I like to get some feedback always from the students. But I was very keen to make sure that we get these two chapters, which are very important when you finish 4 weeks of the extensive technical things, not very technical, but you can basically see the application and just say, look, it's worth it. This course is really giving me an option to excel if you like. Um OK, so the next one, chapter 3. I wanted to cover this only when we do the foundation when you go to tutorial next week this week. I said to your tutors you don't need to focus on the international monetary system I'm covering but just cover the examples of operating or economic exposure as well as transaction exposure. Let me, let me give you first a 4 minutes, 34 minutes, this snapshot of the International Monetary systems, and then I'll cover as much as I can, OK, for the remaining time. The world has gone through transformation after the industrial revolution. Gold was always something very, very precious. People have discovered it centuries back. But then production of gold has intensified after the Industrial Revolution like many other things. Many people travelled from different parts of the world to Australia in search of gold in the 19th century US, Latin America. Africa, etc. etc. and the countries themselves, they tried to dig in in their own countries for gold, and so gold, the standard existed as international monetary as the foundation of the international monetary system we call it, but frankly in the 17th, 18th century, 19th century up until even part of the 20th century. The global economy was so small compared to what we have now. Volume of trade increased, but in proportion to what's happened in the last several decades. It's not comparable. The amount of foreign direct investment American companies in China, Chinese companies in the rest of the world, Europeans everywhere didn't exist. They have a different influence of governments, empires if you like, in the 19th century or earlier, even 16th, 17th, 18th century. But the modern multinational companies, as you might remember, it started in 1870 only after the industrial revolution and the beginning of what is called globalisation. And so we are going to look at the evolution of the international monetary system, particularly after the Second World War. So let me cover what I can cover, and that is the first thing I want to say is we need a globalised economy. We are unable to close our economy to say we don't want to know anything about the rest of the world. Do ourselves everything we want to protect our national interests and our national, if you like, security, which is absolutely fair, and we should do it. I'm not saying we shouldn't do it, but in a global economy we are highly interconnected. And it's not as simple as we like to see. So therefore, in financial terms we say we've got a triangle here, impossible trinity. Fixed exchange rate. You've set up exchange rate. Don't worry about all the transaction exposure, transaction exposure, economic exposure, translation. Maybe translation exposure is different because you're still dealing with foreign, but fixed exchange rate, sovereign monetary policy, you set up your interest rate regardless of what's happening to. Middle East and price of oil sometimes even you can take that to an extreme free capital flow and the other option is you can say. At the same time, while I want to have my sovereignty, at the same time, while I want to have control over the price of my currency, but I cannot close my economy and say foreigners cannot bring their money here or our investors cannot invest overseas. And so that's where it's called free capital flow in this context. Nations can engage in only two of the three, so you can deal with two of them. You can have fixed exchange and sovereign monetary, but you have to close your economy. That's the dilemma of national security versus global security, national financial security versus global financial security. And this crisis one after another over the time that we can remember, at least in the 20th century and 21st century, are always dilemma of these two forces. There are various systems in place. Exchange rates are free float, managed float. Free float means large price of apple and orange. Don't do anything. The exchange rate between US and euro will define by supply and demand. The other one is managed fraud, which is the case where there are central banks. Sometimes there are interventions by central banks in the US and Eurozone, but that is mainly the currencies of many countries around the world these days. Crawling pig. This is basically another way of, if you like, controlling the exchange rate from time to time but trying to stabilise if you like the exchange rate. Target zone arrangements used to be for the European Union where Eurozone at the time that they were forming one single currency. Fed rate is exchange rate that we used to have in Australia. At the moment many other countries have it, including China as a major power, and there are benefits and costs for any of these systems, flexible versus fixed exchange rate. Currency board. This is another currency where you basically lock yourself against the currency of another country. Argentina did peso said we are going to fix our basically monetary policy based on US dollars. You adopt basically foreign currency as your currency and you need to be prepared to buy and sell in this context, so currency board or no separate legal tender and monetary union, which was what we formed as part of Euro zone where they formed a single currency. Anyway, the reason why I'm just going through that is very briefly, have a look. Exchange rate, price of apple and orange is free float. I go very fast. managed float. I already said to you what you see in Western countries, if I put it OECD, crawling the currency is fixed to another currency, but exchange. is periodically revised according to market forces such as inflation. Target zone was to do with the euro zone. Prices couldn't go below a band, upper band and lower band here. They used to make sure that the Italianli doesn't go down by 30% against Deutsche Bank, Deutsch currency, which was happening all the time. And so that system has changed to what single currency is. Fixed exchange rates are already said to you. Currency board already said no separate legal tender. Basically you use someone else's currency as your currency and monetary union that you already witnessed with the emergence of a single currency in Europe. Here are just a summary of some of these basic monetary systems. In tutorial you've got 5 of them. Just be aware of this monetary system that there is not one single way to have value for your currencies in your country. You've got more than 180 countries around the world, so there are many countries that have got different ways of measuring the value of their currency which defines their purchasing power, which defines their capacity to import or export, and so you need to be mindful of a while it's very globalised at the same time it's very nationalised. Um OK, so I don't go to advantage or disadvantage of the fixed versus flexible, but all I want to say is both flexible exchanges we have in Australia and America and other places and fixed exchange, each of them have got different strengths and weaknesses. You don't need to worry too much about them. I'm not going to go through all the history of the international monetary system. All I want to say is, which is very informative for you guys, is first of all a system, let me just say managing a national money supply credited to David Hume. And then each nation's currency is directly convertible to a fixed quantity of gold. This fixing to gold results in a fixed exchange rate, so. Let me just briefly, I don't want to go through all these details, so I just want to listen to what I'm saying. Basically you've got gold, you set up the price of your currency against gold. Say in the case of the US, $35 US dollars buys one ounce of gold. In the case of the pound, the sterling after the First World War was 7 pounds buying 1 ounce of gold, and then other currencies are then priced against the US dollar, which in turn is priced against something very stable called gold, $35 US dollars. One ounce of gold buys $35 US dollars. So what is your currency at German Deutschmark? You tell me what. your currency against US dollars, take into account the price of gold against the US dollar, which is 1 ounce versus 35. So that basically has been a defining, if you like, way of looking at the gold as a gold system, as a reserve currency, but The actual amount of gold is limited. If you go and dig the entire wall these days, you cannot find enough gold to back off. Trillions and trillions of financial assets which are floating in the global market, you cannot convert them into gold. That's the crux of the matter. Gold is standard work in the 19th century, in part of the 20th century, no longer gold is able to back up everything you want to do. And therefore people, central banks around the world, they hold. Foreign currencies which are credible, I already mentioned to you major currencies of the world. As the reserve as a backup for supply or printing money and credibility of the country and credibility of the central bank. In the past. Because the geopolitics wasn't as bad as what it is today. Many central banks have started selling even their gold. They didn't want to hold gold. The Bank of England famously sold trucks and trucks and trucks of gold, basically. They said we don't need gold. All we need to hold is euro, US dollar, Swiss franc, and other currencies. They will be as good as gold. But the world has changed, and I'm coming to that for this lecture to make sure that I will finish it here. So the gold standard, I already said to you guys, if you want to look at 1 ounce is equal to 35 US 1 pound sterling. It's I've already gone through that. This is a very beautiful visual presentation for you to look at. Classical gold 1821 to 1914, 1st World War. Gold exchanges started in 1925 to 19931, which collapsed basically. People have walked away from this currency. Everyone started basically devaluing their currency against gold. And beg thy neighbour became the crux of the matter. They wanted to export, so they tried to devalue their currency. The system collapsed at the beginning of the great Economic depression. And then Bretton Woods 1946 to 1941 was after the First World War, where basically After the Second World War, IMF emerged, World Bank emerged, GATT General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, which now is called World Trade organisation, emerged, and then they agreed everyone to have US dollar as the benchmark against gold, $35 against one ounce of gold, and then every other currency basically pegged to US dollar. So you can value the currency against yourself. This system 1971 basically sort of virtually collapsed. I mean in effect you can say collapsed because the US dollar was facing the Vietnam War. They were printing too much money. People have lost their confidence in the US dollar. They said the US government is creating too much money. We don't have enough gold to back up the printed US dollars in the financial market. They had to devalue their currency by 3%. Here the so-called Smithsonian agreement emerged, so there have been some agreement that the US dollar has to devalue. They tried to stabilise the financial international monetary system, but by 1973 people have lost their confidence in the US dollar more and more. And then they started buying Deutsche Mark, which was German currency, which was absolutely very credible those days. They did so much that the supply and demand means you buy more apple, the price of Apple goes up. The central bank, Bundesbank in Germany, decided to let the market decide about the value of Deutsche Mark rather than say we peg it to the US dollar according to the Bretton Woods system. And so what happened suddenly the value of Deutsche Mark. Doubled if you like significant appreciation of the currency, we call it revaluation those days and then by doing that, then the Deutsch basically the Deutschmark has become flexible and other countries. Away from Bretton Woods, and many currencies gradually became flexible exchange rates. They let the market decide about the price of a currency, the way you decide about the price of orange, apple, aircraft, etc. So a currency became a commodity. That's the beginning of basically what you see. And then from there, as I said, gradually more and more countries concluded, if you like, went through this system. One thing I want to say, however, is Um The central banks in recent times they started buying back gold. You know, the price of gold has gone up from 2000 to $5000. Now it's a little bit down to $4500 or something. So I just thought I'd better let the students know that there have been a number of forces, if you like, geopolitics. Against geopolitical sanctions, diversity of their foreign exchange. Let me just read it. Central banks have rapidly accumulated gold instead of US dollar to protect against geopolitical sanctions, diversify their foreign exchange reserves, and hedge against massive national debt and inflation in the US, as well as their own country, of course, why the structural shift away from dollar towards gold is driven by several factors. So suddenly geopolitics has intensified. One of them was the war in Ukraine. And so that basically has shifted some of the risk. Central banks realise that holding foreign currency reserves, specifically US Treasury, carries risks as they can be frozen or impounded. In other words, the US imposes sanctions on China or other countries. Gold offers a politically neutral physical alternative. Zero counterparty. So you've got gold which doesn't have a counterparty as opposed to currencies. Unlike the fiat currencies or government bonds, which depends on the issuer's ability to pay. Physical gold has no counterparty risk. It is a tangible asset that retains its value even if a country is cut off from the global financial system. In theory, that is correct. I have to say. In reality, the interconnectedness of global financial markets and global economies is in such a way you can have gold, mountains of gold. It's not necessarily going to solve if there is a real crisis, solve the problem by simply showing the mountains of gold. But nevertheless, the argument is. Hedging against debt and inflation, global central banks are concerned about US federal debt, $38 trillion and the US dollar eroding purchasing power. Gold acts as a safe haven asset during times of crisis. However, this is the point. Constrained supply while governments can print on limited amount of fired currency. Physical gold is strictly limited to how much can be mined annually, making it inherently resistant to devaluation. So the reality is that at the end of the day we can't have enough gold. To suddenly replace the international monetary system back to the old gold system that we used to have in the 19th century, that's the crux of the matter. But nevertheless, I think you need to be mindful of the evolution of the international monetary system and the fact that There are concerns about the stability of the current international monetary system, and we need to find, if you like, a constructive way of ensuring that the financial system becomes more resilient and exchange rates becomes more predictable so that the financial market doesn't constantly be concerned about financial risk management of currencies and other associated assets. I think with that in mind, I think we can finish this lecture even if I wanted to say a little bit about the European Union and the emergence of the euro currency, but let me see, maybe I might cover it in the next lecture, but maybe not. Thank you very much for your patience. I really appreciate you being so good. Thanks. OK, see you, bye. But you can Thank you.
